Black Mountain College Was a Mess
And also, it worked.
Carl DiSalvo
Aug 12, 2026

For a while now I’ve been interested in Black Mountain College. It’s an example of a school that melded together many ways of knowledge and making through an experimental approach to learning and teaching. It’s also not too far away, in a part of the country that’s grown meaningful to me. The closeness, culture of the place, and familiarity of the landscape add to its appeal.

Over the past few years, I’ve collected and been gifted quite a pile of books on Black Mountain College. Many of them are gorgeous volumes of photographs of the school, the people, and all the things made there, and I’ve often flipped through them. But it’s only in the last year I’ve been seriously reading these books, studying Black Mountain College.

There’s no reason to be familiar with Black Mountain College, so a bit of background. The college was an experimental liberal arts school that operated from 1933 to 1957 in the Blue Ridge Mountains near the town of Black Mountain, North Carolina. It was founded by John Andrew Rice and a small group of faculty after Rice was dismissed from another college over disputes about academic freedom and his progressive educational philosophy. Together, they envisioned a school where learning would be driven by inquiry rather than rigid curricula, and where the arts would occupy a central place in a liberal education.

What’s not to love?

From the beginning, Black Mountain attracted an amazing faculty. Josef and Anni Albers arrived after the closure of the Bauhaus. They were joined by composer John Evarts and philosopher and educational theorist Theodore Dreier. Black Mountain is perhaps best remembered for the artists who passed through, including John Cage, Merce Cunningham, and Buckminster Fuller as visiting faculty, and students like Robert Rauschenberg, Cy Twombly, and Ruth Asawa. Writers including Charles Olson, Robert Creeley, Denise Levertov, and Robert Duncan made the college an important place for American poetry.

All tucked into the hot, human, and ridiculously beautiful hills of Appalachia.

To give a sense of the learning environment…there were two divisions for students, Junior Division and Senior Division. It was up to the students to decide when they had learned enough to take the exam to move from one division to the next. The exam consisted of two days of written questions followed by an oral examination that lasted… as long as it had to. For the written exam, students were allowed to use their notes, the library, their experience, really anything they had access too. The questions weren’t limited to topics covered in courses; they were questions that tested a student’s ability to engage in investigation and analysis. Imagine being asked: “How do you know the Philippine Islands exist?” and given nine hours to discover and write-up an answer.

One of my favorite books so far is Martin Duberman’s Black Mountain: An Exploration in Community. Most of the other books I have are about the arts of Black Mountain. This one, as the title suggests, is about the community, the people who came together to found, create, and sustain, the place. It’s a massive history book, over 500 pages, and Duberman spent years interviewing folks who had been part of Black Mountain College, including faculty, visitors, and students, and pouring over all manner of documents in the archives, from faculty meeting minutes to fundraising letters.

And one of the things we learn is that Black Mountain College was a mess.

From the start, it was unstable. Finances were precarious. The buildings in the first few years were rented from a summer camp. The relationship with the nearby towns was shaky due to all manner of rumors and truths about the goings at the college (they wore sandals and rolled-up dungarees!). The cast of characters were opinionated to the point of being stubborn, and most all of them were exceptional at arguing—a dangerous combination. The courses offered depended entirely on the faculty present, their interests and abilities. Lauded progressive endeavors, such the farm work program, were tumultuous. The democratic governance of the school, for which it was renowned, was tenuous and at times served to reinforce conservative positions. The value of the education was uncertain and the college was never actually accredited. Very few students “graduated,” whatever that might mean in such an open educational context.

Perhaps none of that instability is surprising. There’s nothing about the structure of Black Mountain College that would suggest financial stability, or any kind of stability for that matter. In fact, it seems it was almost intentionally unstable, or at least, many of the things that usually provide institutional stability were purposefully omitted from its operations. Governance is often difficult, but especially so when undertaken by a group of people self-selecting against authority and routine.

In other words, a mess.

And also, it worked.

Reading through this, I’ve tried to make sense of it.

How did it work?*

Was it the extraordinary faculty? Maybe, but also, the extraordinary faculty were part of what Black Mountain College difficult, doggedly holding their educational ideologies dear and often teaching ideas that had yet to be fully thought through. Was it the democratic approach to decision making? Well, as with many democratic communities, charisma and authority were strong forces of influence. Was it freedom from familiar institutional traditions? Yes, but that that freedom also limited access to funds and made accreditation impossible.

There’s probably some organizational theory that explains this, which I just don’t know.

Here’s what I’ve come up…

It worked because they had a mess they believed in and were committed to.

Part of that belief and commitment was attending to the mess.

For folks at Black Mountain College, it wouldn’t have been enough to sit in a library are read theories of progressive education. They did the work of cultivating and sustaining those conditions. They made the school happen, and kept it open for decades. They built programs, such as the farm work program, and they debated those programs for hours over and over again, while also doing them. It was an abstract ideal, but put into steadfast practice. They were committed to doing the work of trying to learn and teach differently, because they shared the principles that motivated that work.

And, part of that belief was also a willingness to let the mess be, because there seemed to be an understanding that the mess it was necessary for the vision.

A mess without belief is a problem, and we’re often driven to clean it up, mostly for the sake of not having a mess anymore. The mess makes our work more difficult, so putting it to rights is the right thing to do because it lets us better get on to our work.

But what if the mess is the work?

For Black Mountain College, it maybe the mess was the work. It had to be relatively contained, occasionally rearranged. But it also had to remain a mess.

They weren’t careless in this. They worked incredibly hard at maintaining an institution that remained unstable but also able to be responsive when needed.

Consider grades, a basic thing in most colleges. At Black Mountain College they did away with grades (of course). But also they also kept a record of grades so, if needed, students could have transcripts. One can imagine the exchange…

Student: “Am I passing my courses?”
College: “That’s the wrong question.”
Graduate School: “We need the student’s grades.”
College: “Oh, we have those.”
Student: “What are they?”
College: “Don’t worry, they’re not important.”

Over twenty-some years, the faculty and students of Black Mountain College could have made all sorts of decisions that would have made the operations of more orderly. But they didn’t.

It was methodical, but it wasn’t efficient.

Digging a ditch, drawing with Josef Albers, milking a cow, taking “Group Dynamics” with John Wallen, debating admissions policy in a hours long meeting, participating in a theatre production of No Exit, reading towards your research…all could be in in week’s work at Black Mountain College, maybe while paying tuition, maybe not, maybe your contract for teaching would be renewed, maybe not. But you would learn, in a Black Mountain College sort of way.

What seemed to make it work, for lack of a better word, was faith: a confidence and devotion to the shared endeavor.

This is the tension that ken wrote about last week.

It’s not being in a mess that’s a problem.

The problem is being in a mess that you don’t believe in.

But a mess you believe in. That can be brilliant.

Image Credit: From the Black Mountain College Research Project Papers, Visual Materials, North Carolina State Archives, Raleigh, NC.

* One could argue that it didn’t work because it’s not still a school, it eventually closed (and that’s another part of the story). But it did run for over twenty years, with more than a 1000 people involved and affected, nurtured some of the most influential creatives of the twentieth century, spawned many books, articles, exhibitions, and continues to be inspirational today. So, as far as I’m concerned, something about it, in some way, worked. In fact, it’s still working.

Thanks for reading Under The Circumstances ! Subscribe for free to receive new posts and support my work.