ators of forms’ (Leroi-Gourhan 1993: 309). This is a point to
which we will return (Chapter 8, p. 115). Our next step, however, is to turn from the
field of archaeology to that of architecture, and from making to building, where we
shall find that many of the same considerations apply.
4
On building a house
The idea of architecture
Much can ride, in English, on the indefinite article. Building is an activity; it is what
builders do. Add the article, however, and the activity is brought to a close. Movement is
stilled, and where people had once laboured with tools and materials, there now stands
a structure – a building – that shows every sign of permanence and solidity. Instead,
attention shifts to what goes on in the building, to the activities – such as cooking,
eating, sleeping and socialising, and perhaps worship – that are conducted under its
roof. It is conventional, at least in western societies, to describe the people who engage
in these activities as the residents of the building. This is to suppose, however, that their
occupation is a matter of taking up, for their own use, a space that has already been
constructed. Thus, even if they have put up the building with their own hands, the
activities of residence are categorically distinguished from those that led to its erection
in the first place. Residence begins when building ends, much as the use of an artefact
follows from its making. We have already seen, however, that in the case of the artefact,
to draw a line between making and using means marking a point in the career of a
thing at which it can be said to be finished, and moreover that this point of completion
can only be determined in relation to a totality that already exists, in virtual form, at
the outset – that is, in relation to a design. It is precisely the same with the building.
If the activities of residence are truly distinct from, and consequential upon, those of
building, then there must be some determinate point at which the building is finished
– when building yields a building – which means, in turn, that its form must be judged
as the realisation of a pre-existent design. This is precisely the judgement that is entailed
in regarding the building as an instance of architecture.
It has, of course, long been the conceit of the architectural profession that all the
creative work that goes into the fashioning of a building is concentrated in the process
of design, and that the subsequent phase of construction adds up to little more than its
realisation in the proverbial ‘bricks and mortar’ of the built environment. The architect
would like to think that the complete building stands as the crystallisation of an original
design concept, with all its components finally fixed in their proper places. As with the 
48 On building a house
jigsaw puzzle, should any components be added, or taken away, the entire structure
would be reduced to incoherence. In the ideal case, once it is finished the building
should hold for all eternity to the form the architect intended for it. ‘The whole idea of
architecture’, writes the inventor and designer Stewart Brand (1994: 2), ‘is permanence.’
Yet buildings are part of the world, and the world will not stop still but ceaselessly
unfolds along its innumerable paths of growth, decay and regeneration, regardless of
the most concerted of human attempts to nail it down, or to cast it in fixed and final
forms. There is inevitably a ‘kink’, as Brand calls it, between the world and our idea of
it: ‘the idea is crystalline, the fact fluid’ (loc. cit.). Builders, in practice if not in principle,
inhabit this kink, and so do residents. For both, it is the process that claims their energy
and attention, more than the product. Builders know all too well that operations seldom
if ever go according to plan. Working in a fickle and inconstant environment, they have
continually to improvise solutions to problems that could not have been anticipated, and
to wrestle with materials that are not necessarily disposed to fall, let alone to remain, in
the shapes required of them. Completion is, at best, a legal fiction. The reality, as Brand
(1994: 64) wryly observes, is that ‘finishing is never finished’.
Nor does the handover of the never-quite-finished building to its legally appointed
residents bring the process any nearer to a conclusion. Only then, according to the
distinguished Portuguese architect Alvaro Siza, does the serious work of building
actually begin, as residents embark on their daily struggle to limit the damage inflicted
by invasions of insects and rodents, the rot brought with fungal infestation and the
corrosive effects of the elements. Rainwater drips through the roof where the wind
has blown off a tile, feeding a mould that threatens to decompose the timbers, the
gutters are full of rotten leaves, and if that were not enough, moans Siza, ‘legions of
ants invade the thresholds of doors, there are always the dead bodies of birds and mice
and cats’ (Siza 1997: 47). Indeed nothing better exemplifies the mismatch between
the perceptions of the architect–designer and those of the resident–builder than their
respective attitudes to rainfall. Within the formal world of the architectural design, rain
is simply unimaginable. Falling raindrops, and the rivulets of running water to which
they give rise when they impact upon surfaces, cannot be part of any plan. Nor is the
geometric purity of the modern architect’s conception to be clouded by prospects of
stormy weather. But with its clean lines, sharp angles and flat surfaces, any building
constructed in accordance with this conception is almost bound to leak. Brand notes
that in the 1980s, some 80 per cent of post-construction claims against architects were
for leaks (Brand 1994: 58). To clients who complained of leaking roofs, the celebrated
American architect, Frank Lloyd Wright, is alleged to have retorted ‘That’s how you
can tell it’s a roof.’ His most famous building, Fallingwater in Pennsylvania, was
affectionately known by its original owner as ‘Rising Mildew’, and as a ‘seven-bucket
building’. A makeshift solution to an endemic problem, the bucket – put in to catch the
drips – perfectly epitomises the kink between the architect’s crystalline conception and
a fluid reality, which it is the occupant’s singular misfortune to have to iron out.
The architect and the carpenter
Yet five centuries before Fallingwater was built, in the first treatise since Graeco-Roman
Antiquity to be written on the theory and practice of architecture, Leon Battista Alberti 
On building a house 49
had warned explicitly against the dangers of rain and exhorted the architect to take
special care in designing the roofs of buildings so as to ensure adequate protection
and runoff. ‘For rain’, Alberti wrote, ‘is always prepared to wreak mischief, and never
fails to exploit even the least opening to do some harm: by its subtlety it infiltrates, by
softening it corrupts, and by its persistence it undermines the whole strength of the
building, until it eventually brings ruin and destruction on the entire work’ (Alberti
1988: 27). Completed around 1450, Alberti’s treatise On the Art of Building in Ten Books
is indeed remarkable for its combination of practical wisdom and design ambition, the
former based on profound respect for traditional and local knowledge, the latter on a
concern to raise the status of the architect to a place of honour and recognition well
above that of the humble craftsman. On the one hand, for example, Alberti (1988: 63)
recommends that in choosing the ground on which to build, advice should always be
sought from local residents whose daily experience both with existing buildings and
with constructing new ones will have yielded a reliable understanding of the nature and
quality of the soil. Yet on the other hand, he paints an unashamedly self-aggrandising
portrait of the architect as a man of ‘learned intellect and imagination’, who is able ‘to
project whole forms in mind without any recourse to the material’ (ibid.: 7). As one of
the founding figures of the European Renaissance, Alberti can be seen in retrospect to
stand at a pivotal juncture in the process that ultimately led to the professionalisation of
architecture as a discipline devoted exclusively to design as opposed to implementation.
His treatise both looks back to the time of his predecessors, the master builders of the
past, and looks forward to a time when the architect would prescribe only the formal
outlines of the building, leaving its actual construction in the skilled and capable hands
of workmen.
In the prologue to the Ten Books, Alberti (1988: 5) is at pains to explain what he
means by an architect. He does so by telling us precisely what the architect is not.
Specifically, he is not a carpenter. ‘For it is no carpenter that I would have you compare
to the greatest exponents of other disciplines: the carpenter is but an instrument
in the hands of the architect.’ But why should Alberti have chosen the carpenter,
of all people, as the architect’s alter-ego? To find the answer, we can return to the
importance that Alberti attaches to ensuring that the building has a well-made roof.
Traditionally fashioned from wooden beams, the construction of the roof would have
been the carpenter’s responsibility. But by a curious twist of fate, the carpenters of
Alberti’s day had commonly come to be known as architects. The designation can
be traced back to an ecclesiastical document from the year 945. It appears that the
author of the document had mistaken the verb architector for a compound of the Latin
arcus (arch) and tectum (roof), jumping to the conclusion that the architect must be a
specialist in the making and repair of vaulted roofs! Over the ensuing centuries other
writers followed this example, until in time the usage became a matter of convention
(Pevsner 1942: 557). Nowadays, if your roof leaks, you might want to blame the
architect for defective design. But in the Middle Ages, you would have called him in
to fix the problem. If the roof was wooden, you would need a carpenter, but if it was
supported by arches of stone you might also need a mason. Indeed the architect, in
medieval times, was as commonly a mason as a carpenter: there were many similarities
in their respective working methods (Pacey 2007: 87), and the skills of masonry
and carpentry were not infrequently combined in one and the same person. In an 
50 On building a house
influential statement, the seventh century scholar Isidore of Seville had identified
the architect as a mason (masionem), a word that he derived, in turn, from the Latin
machina, meaning the hoist that is required to lift heavy materials in constructing the
high walls and roof.
Significantly, however, he was also regarded as one who lays out the foundations
for the building (Carruthers 1998: 22, 284 fn. 40). In this latter regard, Isidore was
following the precedent of the Apostle St Paul, in the first of his Letters to the
Corinthians. Describing himself as a ‘wise masterbuilder’, Paul declares: ‘I have laid
the foundation, and another buildeth thereon’ (Corinthians I, III: 10). The notion
that the architect, however skilled he may be, is no mere mason or carpenter but
rather one who lays the foundations on which others build, conforms more closely
to the conventions of Graeco-Roman Antiquity than to those of the Middle Ages.
Etymologically, the term ‘architect’ is of Greek rather than Latin origin, and translates
quite literally as master-builder (from arkhi-, chief, and tekton, maker).1
 In Greece,
Plato had insisted that the architect ‘is not himself a workman, but a ruler of
workmen’, and in his Ten Books on Architecture the Roman author Vitruvius, writing
in the first century BC, likewise emphasised the need for the architect to have a
thorough knowledge of both theory and practice, and to combine manual skill with
sound scholarship (Vitruvius 1914: 5). As Nikolaus Pevsner (1942: 549) has pointed
out, Vitruvius was undoubtedly thinking not of masons or carpenters but of learned,
literate men of high social standing. It is no surprise, then, that Alberti, seeking to
restore the architects of his own time to similar standing, should have modelled his
own Ten Books on the Vitruvian precedent.2
 Nor is it surprising that he sought to
distinguish the architect from the carpenter, for in doing so he wanted to lay to rest,
once and for all, the medieval idea of the architect as a lay craftsman, and to replace
this figure on the pedestal on which he had formerly stood in antiquity.3
 What he also
drew from antiquity, however, was an unequivocal commitment to the hylomorphic
model of making, as a bringing together of form and matter. ‘The building’, he
observes, ‘consists of lineaments and matter, the one the product of thought, the other
of Nature, the one requiring the mind and the power of reason, the other dependent
on preparation and selection; but … neither on its own would suffice without the
hand of the skilled workman to fashion the material according to lineaments’ (Alberti
1988: 5). What Alberti here calls ‘lineaments’ (lineamenta) comprise a precise and
complete specification of the form and appearance of the building, as conceived by
the intellect, independently and in advance of the work of construction (structura).
Just as for Vitruvius, theory (ratiocinatio) precedes and underwrites practice (opus), so
for Alberti, lineamenta precede and underwrite structura (Rykwert et al., in Alberti 1988:
422; see also Vitruvius 1914:11).
Practical geometry
On paper, the lineaments would have been inscribed as drawn lines, which could
be either straight or curved, and which meet or intersect at certain angles. This was
drawing, however, understood not as the trace of a gesture but as the geometric
projection of a conceptual image. It was in this sense that in a number of European
languages, the word for drawing came to be the same as that for design: in French 
On building a house 51
dessin, in Italian disegno, in Spanish dibujar. In each case, whether as design or drawing,
the connotations were of pattern and intent rather than of movement or process
(Maynard 2005: 66–67). As long ago as 1568, Giorgio Vasari wrote, in this vein, that
disegno ‘is nothing but a visual expression and clarification of that concept which one
has in the intellect, and that which one imagines in the mind and builds up in the idea’
(cited in Panofsky 1968: 62). Indeed Alberti’s lines have their source in the formal
geometry of Euclid. ‘The straight line’, he explains, ‘is the shortest possible line that
may be drawn between two points’, while ‘the curved line is part of a circle’ (Alberti
1988: 19). What art historian Jean-François Billeter writes of the line of Euclidean
geometry applies with equal force to the Albertian lineament: it ‘has neither body nor
colour nor texture, nor any other tangible quality: its nature is abstract, conceptual,
rational’ (Billeter 1990: 47). The space thus delineated on paper, as Bruno Latour
and Albena Yaneva (2008: 82) have observed, is a world apart from that in which real
buildings are built and inhabited.
Now the masons and carpenters of the medieval period also drew lines, and made
use of a certain geometry in doing so (Pacey 2007: 59–86). They even appealed to
Euclid. But theirs was a geometry informed by a tactile and sensuous knowledge of
line and surface rather than by an eye for abstract, conceptual form. And their Euclid
was a legendary figure very different from the real Euclid of Alexandria whom we
remember today as the author of the Elements. A story recounted of Euclid by an
unknown cleric from the late fourteenth century, and incorporated into the English
‘Constitutions of Masonry’, offers a clue to the difference. According to this story,
Euclid had learned his geometry from the biblical Abraham, for whom he had worked
as a clerk during the latter’s stay in Egypt. At that time, the waters of the Nile flooded
the land to such an extent that people could not dwell along it, but Euclid taught
the people how to build walls and ditches to keep the water out, and by means of
geometry he measured out and partitioned the land. And so, the story continues, the
Egyptians ‘took their sons to Euclid to govern them at his own will and he taught to
them the craft of masonry and gave it the name of Geometry because of the parting of
the ground that he had taught to the people’ (in Harvey 1972: 197). On the evidence
of this account, as the architectural historian Lon Shelby (1972: 396–397) remarks,
‘for mediaeval masons Euclid had virtually become the eponymous hero of a craft,
and the word geometry had become synonymous with masonry … That is to say,
neither “Euclid” nor “geometry” may have meant to mediaeval masons what today
we mean by Euclidean geometry’. So what did geometry mean to the craftsmen of
the Middle Ages?
It was, in the first place, an essentially practical pursuit, rather than a matter of
theory. Already in the twelfth century, the Parisian philosopher–theologian Hugh of
St Victor had divided the discipline of geometry into two branches: the theoretical
and the practical, though his idea of practical geometry was limited to what we would
now call surveying (Shelby 1972: 401–402). Evidently influenced by Hugh, his near
contemporary, the Spanish philosopher and translator Dominicus Gundissalinus,
explained that in geometry, the purpose of theory is to teach, by way of formal
demonstration and proof, whereas the purpose of practice is to achieve results. For
Gundissalinus, however, practical geometers were of two kinds: besides surveyors,
there were also craftsmen. The latter, he tells us,
52 On building a house
are those who exert themselves by working in the constructive or mechanical arts
– such as the carpenter in wood, the smith in iron, the mason in clay and stones…
Each indeed forms lines, surfaces, squares, circles, etc., in material bodies in the
manner appropriate to his art. These many kinds of craftsmen are distinguished
according to the different materials in which and out of which they work. Any
one of these thus has his proper materials and instruments. The instruments …
of the carpenters are the axe, adze, broadaxe, string and many others. Those of the
smith are the anvil, shears, hammer, and many others. Those of the masons are
the string, trowel, plumb, bob, and many others…
(cited in Shelby 1972: 403)
Now it is very unlikely that any medieval mason or carpenter would have had access to
the teachings of theoretical geometry, which were mainly confined to the universities,
that had little to offer them, and to books they could ill afford (Shelby 1970: 14–15).
Already in possession of a corpus of traditional geometrical knowledge adequate to his
purpose, the craftsman would have had no need for academic book-learning (Harvey
1972: 114). His knowledge would have been largely acquired ‘on the job’, through
apprenticeship to a master. It was a matter of learning by doing, rather than acquiring
theoretical precepts for subsequent application in practice. The craftsman operated not
with theorems but with rules of thumb, valued not for their mathematical correctness
or logical consistency but for their guidance in getting the job done. The geometry
of masons and carpenters, as Gundissalinus explains, was carried out on site with the
tools of their trades, including axes and chisels of all kinds, trowel, plumb line and
string, along with three crucial instruments that he does not mention, namely, pre-cut
templates, straight edge and square (Shelby 1971: 142).
Precisely because this knowledge was both learned and passed on as a living tradition,
in the spoken words and manifest deeds of practitioners, it has left little documentary
trace. A rare exception is the sketchbook, with accompanying instructions, bequeathed
by the French master mason, Villard de Honnecourt. Writing in the thirteenth century,
Villard hopes that those who peruse his book will find in it ‘sound advice on the great
techniques of masonry and on the devices of carpentry … as the discipline of geometry
requires and instructs’ (in Barnes 2009: 35). One page from the sketchbook gives a
good idea of what this geometric art entailed (Figure 4.1).4
 The upper two rows give
instructions, among other things, for measuring the diameter of a cylindrical shaft
(rest the shaft against a wall, and rest a square with its short side on the shaft and its
long side against the wall), for cutting the keystones and voussoirs for an arch, and for
raising the spire of a tower. Below are three more drawings. The one on the left tells
how to cut the voussoirs for a hanging arch. During construction, the pendant of the
arch is temporarily supported by a tree trunk. Fix a nail on the trunk halfway from
the base to the crown of the wall and tie a string to the nail. Stretching the string to
points along the arch gives the angles of cut. The drawing in the middle shows how
to obtain two pillars of the same height without the use of plumb line or level. Place a
hinged post halfway between the two pillars so that it touches the top of one of them.
Then swing it across to check the height of the other. On the right of the page is a
drawing of a tower. To determine the height of the tower, set an instrument shaped
as a right-angled isosceles triangle on the ground such that when you look up along 
On building a house 53
the hypotenuse, from ground level, your line of sight strikes the top of the tower. The
distance along the ground from the tip of the triangle to the base of the tower then
equals the height (Barnes 2009: 140–145, see also Shelby1972: 409–410; Bucher 1979:
122–124). What is striking about these procedures is not just their simplicity but their
sheer physicality. In the practice of their geometry, masons and carpenters did not
project onto stone and wood forms that had already been deduced through the power
of abstract reason and rational calculation. They solved design problems as they went
along, through the manipulation of the instruments and materials at their disposal, and
drawing on a fund of ‘tricks of the trade’ – such as those illustrated by Villard – picked
up on the way.
Figure 4.1 A page from the portfolio of Villard de Honnecourt (sheet 20, verso). (Courtesy
of the Bibliothèque nationale de France.)
54 On building a house
Plans in stone
In that sense, as Shelby (1972: 409) shows, their geometry was not just practical but,
more precisely, constructive. Their straight lines were not the notional point-to-point
connectors of Euclid, but actual lengths of cord pegged out on site and at full scale
(Pacey 2007: 63). Their points were nails or stakes, hammered into wood or ground.
And the figures of their geometry were not empty outlines but solid, weighty pieces
with tangible surfaces and edges, cut and shaped from wood or stone. And among these
shapes, by far the most important were the templates or ‘moulds’ that were used as
guides to stone cutting.5
 These templates were usually made from thick planks of wood,
though they were sometimes cut from canvas or parchment, or occasionally sheets of
lead (Shelby 1971: 142–143; Pacey 2007: 35). The master mason would draw designs
onto planks, and the carpenter would cut them out, after which they would be passed
to the workmen on site, with the task of actually cutting the stone.
The art of cutting solids into pieces that fit together tightly is known technically as
stereotomy – from the classical Greek stereo, solid, and tomia, to cut (Sanabria 1989: 266;
Frampton 1995: 5). It is simple enough to build a wall of rectangular blocks, but in the
construction of complex buildings with arches, vaults and pinnacles, medieval masons
faced formidable stereotomical challenges. These challenges were not solved, however,
through exact pre-calculation and precision cutting. They were rather solved through
a combination of rule of thumb and creative extemporisation, leaving ample scope, as
Shelby (1971: 154) notes, ‘for individual differences and the play of personal choice’.
Although the constructive geometry of the masons laid down carefully prescribed steps
that apprentices were taught to follow, none was so constraining as actually to preordain
the course of action, nor were the rules they observed any substitute for the skill and
inventiveness, born of long experience, on which the success of their enterprise finally
depended (Shelby 1972: 420). ‘Rules of art can be useful’, observes philosopher Michael
Polanyi (1958: 50), ‘but they do not determine the practice of an art; they are maxims,
which can serve as a guide to an art only if they can be integrated into the practical
knowledge of the art. They cannot replace this knowledge.’ The masons’ rules were
maxims in this sense: they comprised resources for action, but did not determine it (see
also Suchman 1987: 52; Ingold 2000: 35–36).
If masons were restricted in what they could do it was not, then, because the
stereotomical puzzle of assembling a building from elementary solids admitted only
one, mathematically correct solution. Though it might seem so to our modern eyes,
great medieval buildings were not assembled like puzzles from pre-cut pieces, nor were
they finished when the last piece was slotted into place. A better analogy, suggested by
John Harvey (1974: 33), might be with the patchwork quilt. As patches are sewn into
the quilt, so stones are added to the building piecemeal, each shaped and, if necessary,
reshaped so as to fit the space prepared for it by previous ones, and in turn preparing the
spaces for those that follow.6
 Here is Hugh of St Victor once again, in his Didascalicon of
1127, describing the mason at work:
Take a look at what the mason does. When the foundation has been laid, he
stretches out his string in a straight line, he drops his perpendicular, and then,
one by one, he lays the diligently polished stones in a row. Then he asks for other
stones, and still others, and if by chance he finds some that do not fit with the 
On building a house 55
fixed course he has laid, he takes his file, smooths off the protruding parts, files
down the rough spots, and the places that do not fit, reduces to form, and so at
last joins them to the rest of the stones set into the row.
(Hugh of St Victor 1961: 140)
It seems from this account that the lineaments of the structure, far from being imposed
upon the material, emerge from the process of building itself. But if that is so, then
what need, if any, did the medieval mason have for designs or plans? Did there have to
be, as Alberti (1988: 7) was later to insist, a ‘precise and correct outline, conceived in
the mind, made up of lines and angles’, before the work of building could even begin?
The question of whether there existed plans or project drawings for complex
medieval buildings such as cathedrals remains unresolved, and expert opinion is
sharply divided. The architectural historian Francis Andrews, in an essay penned in
1925, answers definitively in the negative:
No church or other work was just the outcome of the mind of any single man
who had sat down and deliberately designed it and having drawn it up then
got up and supervised its execution… Such a man was not necessary… What
was wanted and what was supplied was the man who would work earnestly and
honourably and leave, so to speak, the designing to take care of itself. Hence
there was no architect to make a design.
(Andrews 1974: 8–9)
Taking precisely the opposite view, Harvey finds it inconceivable that even the simplest
building can be put up without its having first been designed, and without that design
having been committed to a surface of some kind. In medieval architecture, Harvey
(1972: 101) argues, drawings were as essential for the transmission of ideas from
the designer to the workmen as is musical notation to the performance of complex
polyphonic music.7
 Shelby, for his part, does not deny the existence of working
drawings, but argues that templates, rather than drawings per se, were the primary
means by which master masons transmitted architectural forms to the workmen who
executed them (Shelby 1971: 142). Following a comprehensive review of the available
evidence, historian of science and technology Arnold Pacey (2007: 161, 228) concludes
that masons were making detail drawings of window tracery from around the beginning
of the thirteenth century, but that drawings of other parts of buildings rarely appear
until much later, and only from the end of the sixteenth century did masons begin to
make drawings of entire structures at less than full scale.
There does seem little doubt that medieval builders drew. What is doubtful is that
any of their drawings can be understood as plans, in the strict sense of a full geometrical
pre-specification of the intended work. For medieval builders, drawing was not the
visual projection of an idea already fashioned in the intellect – as implied by the
synonymy of drawing and design in disegno – but a craft of weaving with lines. As
architectural design theorist Lars Spuybroek (2011: 18) has argued, it was in this regard
more descriptive than prescriptive. Today’s architectural drawings, complete with front and
side views and cross sections depicted at various scales, precisely specify the final form
of the whole structure. Medieval builders, by contrast, would draw, say, the tracery for a 
56 On building a house
window at full scale, on a stone tracing floor, as a way of working out particular details
preparatory to their actual carving in stone. There was no radical division here between
drawing and building, as though the former were exclusively on the side of abstract
design and the latter on the side of material execution; rather, both were integral to the
craft itself: whereas the draughtsman ‘draws as if he is weaving’, the stonemason ‘carves
as if he is drawing’ (Spuybroek 2011: 40). In short, design was neither placed before the
work, as Harvey contends, nor left to take care of itself, as does Andrews. For it was
in the very course of ‘taking care’ – in the intelligence of skilled craftsmanship – that
medieval buildings were designed. Of the masons who built them, we can say that they
both designed as they drew, and drew as they designed. But their designing, like their
drawing, was a process of work, not a project of the mind.
The cathedral and the laboratory
Recently, the whole issue of whether or in what sense medieval buildings can be said to
have been planned has been revisited in a strikingly original contribution by sociologist
of science David Turnbull (1993, see also Turnbull 2000: 53–87). His focus is on the
building of the magnificent Gothic cathedral of Chartres. Rebuilt, following a fire,
between the years 1194 and 1230, the cathedral has a spire of 345 feet, and has stood for
nearly eight centuries. Yet if the building ever had an architectural designer, his identity
is unknown; nor are any plans extant. It is of course impossible to prove beyond doubt
that no prior designs or plans existed for Chartres, nor does Turnbull make any attempt
to do so. There are all sorts of reasons why plans, had they existed, might not have
survived: clearly – as Pacey (2007: 59) notes – a plan marked out at full size ‘would
occupy as much space on the ground as the actual building’, and would simply be
swallowed up by the construction. Turnbull’s critique is rather directed at those, such
as Harvey (1972: 101), who assume on grounds of logic and principle that plans had to
exist, since without them no complex structure could ever get built.8
 ‘To the modern
mind’, Turnbull (1993: 319–320) writes, ‘the design argument in architecture seems
self-evident.’ Yet to attribute all form to a prior design specification, he maintains,
‘explains too little and too much’.
On the one hand, designs do not magically transmute into the forms they specify.
Their fulfilment calls for workmanship, and in the case of a building like Chartres
Cathedral, it was clearly workmanship of a very high order. Even Alberti recognised
that ‘the hand of the skilled workman’ is needed to fashion a structure according to
lineaments. The argument from design explains too little because it does not account
for workmanship. But to make up for the deficit it pretends that all skilled practice
can ultimately be factored as the sequential output of a codified system of rules and
algorithms. It is in this respect that the argument explains too much, for as Turnbull
(1993: 320) remarks, it ‘attributes powers to rules they cannot have’. As we have already
seen, the rules followed by medieval cathedral builders could not and did not prescribe
their practice in every detail, but instead allowed scope for action to be precisely finetuned in relation to the exigencies of the situation at hand.
In an audacious move, Turnbull invites us to compare the work of building a cathedral,
in medieval times, to what goes on in a large-scale research laboratory, in our own
day. In the laboratory, teams of researchers are beavering away at the task of advancing 
On building a house 57
knowledge in some branch of science. Each team operates more or less autonomously,
under the direction of research leaders who come and go, while nevertheless keeping
in touch with all the others, exchanging information about protocols and procedures,
methods and equipment, experimental results and the new ideas and thinking that flow
from them. Out of all this activity, there emerges an edifice of a kind, recognisable
as a body of knowledge. But this body is not the brainchild of a lone genius, born
fully formed from his superior intellect, nor is the work of the laboratory singlemindedly dedicated to its empirical substantiation. It is rather a composite of many
parts, imperfectly integrated, every part conditioned by ways of doing things peculiar to
each of the teams that have contributed to its development, and patched together thanks
to communicative exchanges between them.
Likewise, a great medieval building, as John James (1985: 123) writes of the cathedral
of Chartres, ‘was the ad hoc accumulation of the work of many men’. According to
James, the work of rebuilding Chartres was carried out by teams of labourers under
the direction of no fewer than nine master masons, in some thirty separate, shortterm campaigns over a period of more than three decades (ibid.: 25, 60). And the
result, despite its exterior magnificence and apparent harmony, is revealed on closer
inspection to be a patchwork of irregularly disposed and imperfectly matched
architectural elements (Figure 4.2). Just as there is no master plan for constructing
the edifice of scientific knowledge, so, too, the building of Chartres did not bring to
glorious completion the speculative vision of an unknown architect. No one could
have predicted, while the work was underway, exactly how it would turn out, what
complications would arise in the process, or what means would be devised to deal
with them. Yet despite the episodic character of the work, and frequent changes of
leadership, a degree of continuity was assured through the traffic of communication
not only between master masons and workers on site, but also between the master and
other masons, and between them and the ecclesiastical patrons who commissioned the
work (Turnbull 1993: 320). And in this communication, no single item played a larger
part than the template.
Chartres remains unfinished. As with every other surviving structure of its kind,
the work of building and rebuilding continues to this day, albeit motivated by a
characteristically modernist desire to preserve in perpetuity what is imagined to have
been a historically completed form, the perfect realisation of an original design. This
one building, then, stands as an embodiment both of the geometric craftsmanship of
the thirteenth century and of the architectural conceits of the twentieth, and gives us a
bridge across which we can return from the building practices of medieval times to the
contemporary understanding of the building, from which I began this chapter, as the
timeless expression of the architect’s vision. Turnbull’s objective is to lay to rest the idea
that any ‘great divide’ separates the sites of technoscientific activity of the past, such as
the cathedral works, and those of the present, such as the laboratory. ‘Technoscience
then and now’, he claims, ‘results from site-specific, contingent and messy practices’
(Turnbull 1993: 332). But if this is true of the modern laboratory, then it is surely
equally true of the sites of contemporary building. Just as science, however, has invested
heavily in the distinction between speculative theory and experimental practice, so
has architecture invested in that between design and construction. Thus in a recent,
authoritative statement, Simon Unwin defines architecture as ‘the determination 
Figure 4.2 Spot the difference! The west facade of Chartres Cathedral. Redrawn from Plate
407 of G. Dehio and G. von Bezold, Die kirchliche Baukunst des Abendlandes: historisch und
systematisch dargestellt. From the collection of the University of Pittsburgh Digital Library,
courtesy of Alison Stones.
On building a house 59
by which a mind gives intellectual structure to a building’, whereas building is ‘the
performance of physical realization’, of which ‘a building’ is the product (Unwin 2007:
102). The architect, then, conceives the lineaments of the structure, while the builder’s
task is to unite the structure with the material.
These definitions, however, belie the creativity of the ‘messy practices’ that give rise
to real buildings. Whether of sketching, tracing, modelling, staking out, digging, cutting,
laying, fixing or joining, all involve care, judgement and aforethought, and are carried
on within worldly fields of forces and relations. None can be placed unequivocally on
one side or the other of any distinction of fundamental ontological import, such as
between intellectual conception and mechanical execution. On what grounds then, if
at all, can architecture be distinguished from building or, more generally, design from
making? This is our topic for the next chapter.