en_US:
en_USP
1856.11
	gregorian
latn"
January"
February"
March"
April"
May"
June"
July"
August"	September"
October"
November"
December*
January*
February*
March*
April*
May*
June*
July*
August*	September*
October*
November*
December2
Jan2
Feb2
Mar2
Apr2
May2
Jun2
Jul2
Aug2
Sep2
Oct2
Nov2
Dec:
Jan:
Feb:
Mar:
Apr:
May:
Jun:
Jul:
Aug:
Sep:
Oct:
Nov:
DecB
SundayB
MondayB
TuesdayB	WednesdayB
ThursdayB
FridayB
SaturdayJ
SundayJ
MondayJ
TuesdayJ	WednesdayJ
ThursdayJ
FridayJ
SaturdayR
SunR
MonR
TueR
WedR
ThuR
FriR
SatZ
SunZ
MonZ
TueZ
WedZ
ThuZ
FriZ
Satb
1st quarter
2nd quarter
3rd quarter
4th quarter
1st quarter
2nd quarter
3rd quarter
4th quarter
Before Christ
Anno Domini
M/d/yy
MMM d, y
	MMMM d, y
EEEE, MMMM d, y
h:mm a
	h:mm:ss a
h:mm:ss a z
h:mm:ss a zzzz
	#,##0.###
#,##0%
#,##0.00
FCFA
CFPF
HP_ENVY_4520_series
	na-letter
Custom Format 1
Office Theme"
>%ff
>-ff
>%"!!?-NNN?5
]w>5
P?%yx
```?%(((?-
a` ?%KK
@@@?%222?-RQQ?5
%?%VVV?-dcc?5
_F?%
0?-ji
{?%LKK?-###?5
4o?-
4%?-
\??-
i>?5
7g?-
[?%L
+~?-}?@?5
H?%1 3?-
>o?5
j?-RKz?5
??%5
yg?%
Q?-t
#s?-
]p*? 
MJ_Interview 2.wh_Joshua
Tue, Oct 18, 2022 3:47PM 
 1:33:11
SUMMARY KEYWORDS
prompt, images, people, phrase, game, journey, guess, person, create, mid, artists, tool, aesthetics, working, feel, community, result, generate, style, diffusion
SPEAKERS
Watson Hartsoe, Joshua
Watson Hartsoe  00:00
Recording in progress. I think the live transcript is on to to make sure. Okay, that's awesome. All right. So as you as you stated before, I totally understand that you want to understand more the nature of this research before you make your decision on anonymity versus being named. But yeah, I guess I just wanted to first off say thank you for even taking any time to, to meet with me and to agree to do an interview.
Joshua  00:29
Sure. Yeah. My pleasure. Okay, so
Watson Hartsoe  00:33
so beyond the naming, I guess we'll just keep it by default. A. I don't I guess I can call you like, Joshua. That's your name. I don't know if that's your preferred name or godotplay?
Joshua  00:45
Yeah. Okay. Yeah. It's Joshua Larson is my name. Okay, Joshua.
Watson Hartsoe  00:51
Yeah. My name is Watson Hartsoe. I'm cool radio in Discord. But um, yeah, I guess like, the scope of this interview is mostly about your usage of Midjourney. Sort of like new creative practices, new ways of thinking about creativity, trying to understand what this tool really means, what it you know, might what effects it might have on creativity and a lot of different expressions. But I guess to get started, just some basic stuff. When did you start using Midjourney?
Joshua  01:20
In June of this year? 2022.
Watson Hartsoe  01:24
Nice. How'd you How'd you hear about it?
Joshua  01:28
Mmm, hmm. I think I first heard about it from the producer of our publisher for the game that we were working on at the time. Either that or Twitter, I can't remember it was both around the same time that I saw people tweeting Midjourney images on Twitter that looked a lot better than, you know, like the Google dream, whatever images that I would see a couple of years ago or whatever. And yeah, it was about around that same time that our producer had mentioned how he had a, an early invite, or something like that. So
Watson Hartsoe  02:15
nice. You remember what your your first prompt was when you first used it?
Joshua  02:21
Yes, I do. I was actually for the project that I'm working on right now are vaguely you know, I made a Zelda temple. Like a temple from from a Zelda game, or, you know, kind of reminiscent of one.
Watson Hartsoe  02:44
So it sounds like you, you started out with a project in mind. And from what you told me before you really use this in an incredible way to like develop this project. So I guess like has from that first prompt to where you're at now has like your, your sense of working with modernity changed at all?
Joshua  03:02
Yeah, drastically. I mean, I was as very naive. just starting out, and although, you know, like, some people, when they start, they just prompt like three words or something. And so I had looked, I think on the community feed or something like that, I looked somewhere, oh, maybe it was maybe it was when I joined just on Discord kind of watching the the newbie channels and you know, this, the kind of channels that you get thrown into as a new user, and seeing what people prompted and trying to get a feel for, you know, the language of prompting. And so then I, yeah, then I wrote my own after just kind of watching for a couple minutes. And that was a really interesting experience. I mean, I could see how for most people, it would be, it would be just kind of overwhelming to be thrown into this huge Discord server, and being dropped into a couple channels, where there's, you know, like, multiple times a second, you see, prompts being written, just continuously and it's like this crazy hive mind stream of consciousness thing. But I, you know, I'm a creative professional, I'm into weird stuff. So I actually thought it was really interesting and fascinating. And and, yeah, just a really cool feeling to get dumped into this sort of wild west of creativity. And so I yeah, I wrote my first prompt, and I don't know I was just really Excited, at first to see, to see images come out of that. And, you know, generally in the style that I was asking for. But that was like the first five, five images or maybe 10 images or something. And pretty quickly after that, I got a lot more advanced. Once I started realizing, you know more fully how things worked. I think it was maybe around then like five or 10 images in or something I went to the community feed, and I was seeing, you know, what were some of the more or prompts for some of the more popular images and stuff like that. And so then my, my craftsman ship crafts person ship, quickly advanced after that. And, and yeah, it was just a, it was a really interesting start, I didn't really expect in terms of, you know, me using it. Even for work, I didn't really expect too much out of this technology. And I didn't, I didn't think it would, I figured it would just be kind of like a cool thing to use on the side, you know, to just enhance some of the concepting work we do or something like that. But it was about two weeks into using the journey that I use this specific phrase. And what came back after kind of digging into it a little bit with, you know, creating some images from it. I found this new style, a new architectural style that I've never seen before. And not that I'm an architectural expert, but I have, you know, taken some classes at school, studied it, you know, looked at plenty of various, you know, architectural concept images and stuff like that. Some, maybe not, maybe I know more than the everyday person, I guess you could say. But I had never seen this style before I was blown away by how interesting and unique it looked. And and what was most inspiring is that, for the game I'm working on, we've had these game design problems, where we're trying to communicate different surface types in the game. And depending on which surface type you have, it leads to a specific kind of gameplay or movement style that you can use, if that makes sense. Because you know, like in any kind of movement based game platform, or what have you, there are certain areas where you can jump on or run on or use use it for different abilities, like Mirror's Edge is maybe one of the most obvious examples where color helps show what you can do in the game. So for our game, it's a similar challenge, where we have surfaces that give you different affordances is like the game designer term for it. They give you different affordances. And we need to figure out how to communicate those as designers to the players. So early on, we had these, we had a specific art style. But then as we developed more of the gameplay, and we created deeper design and added more tools and stuff, we thought that we needed to change the art style in order to kind of solve those issues that came up. And when I saw this new style, I realized like, oh, that's actually the older style that we moved away from. But in this case, it actually works. Instead of previously where we had like a vaguely the same style, but it just didn't really work in terms of the design and art direction and stuff like that didn't seem like the visuals would be good enough, you know, the the production level would be high enough. And so we kind of went in a slightly different direction. But But then, you know, that kind of came with its own set of problems that were hard. It turned out to be pretty hard to solve. And so when that happened, I saw this new style. I finally realized that this is a tool that's like could be much more than just an interesting compliment to like To like game developers tool set, you know, like, you could use it as a primary concept design tool. So that blew me away. And using that one phrase, I ended up creating about 10,000 images or a little more or something, just trying to explore a lot of different facets of it, you know, like, what kinds of different buildings could I do? Can I make a cityscape in this style? Could I make different residential buildings, commercial buildings, all that kind of stuff. And so at that point, I realized that we should kind of base we should sort of rework our art direction again, and kind of center it more around this style. Because it just solved our design problems in elegant way, and then being able to see the finished result, and know that it works, because I can see a finished rendering, prove to me that this direction could work. And that was something that just made me think about this technology in a whole new way. Because, you know, in a traditional creative process, you create 100 thumbnails, and they're just like, really rough sketches on pencil. And then you, you know, narrow that down to 10 to 15. And then you create, you know, color thumbnails from that. And then from those, you know, you create several, kind of more finished sketches, or whatever. And then from that, you develop a final email. And I mean, like, that's the traditional, very traditional design process. And it makes perfect sense, because whatever takes the least amount of time, you can do a lot more of that. And then as you invest more and more time, you have to narrow it down more and more. But this was, the style that I kind of discovered in this process wasn't something I knew that it wasn't something that we could have come to, in a traditional process, because we already tried at least a vague kind of sketch version of it. And it didn't work in its sketch form. But for some reason, it did work. And it's finalized form. And so. So yeah, that just like, it kind of blew my mind, because I realized, there are tons and tons of, you know, like millions and what however many billions of designs that would be like that, if you just think about the possibility space terms of design, there are all these designs that you think aren't going to work. But it's only because you don't have a finished rendering of something in front of you the finished version of it. And what this AI generation technology allows for, is for you to experiment and brainstorm ideas that result in a finished render. And that allows for just a insanely deeper, broader exploration of a design space than ever before. You know, like, with a little indie studio, like ours, we have very limited budget for art. And as part of that, you know, for exploring art direction, and concept design and stuff like that. And so, so, yeah, that it was kind of like, everything changed after that, you know. So by the time I was into, whatever, mid July, a month later, I was deeply invested. And, and I knew that this technology would kind of change everything going forward in terms of our creative process, as a studio. And and for me, you know, as a, as an individual, professional as well. So sorry, that was a lot of talking. But
Watson Hartsoe  14:03
I'm so appreciative of that. It was very coherent. And like, I was just like, Yeah, tell me more. I mean, I still think that's where I'm at. I guess like, yeah, there's a few places where I think I'm curious, like, about, like, the role of other people community where you learning from people as you were doing this, looking at what you were doing, how are you communicating this with your team? So I mean, I guess Yeah, as much as you want to talk about, sort of, like the social dimension of this. Really? Yeah, I'm really curious about that.
Joshua  14:32
Yeah, um, yeah. So in terms of the team, I was meeting with them and kind of showing them the results I was getting and talking through like, hey, you know, this really seems like it'll design it'll solve a couple of our design challenges that we've had. And, you know, it just allows us to Have all of these reference images to make things from, you know, in terms of the modeling. And so, I mean, for me though it was, it was kind of an easy like talking to the team was an easy thing, because I'm the director of the project and the project lead. And so I could kind of make that decision from the top down. So I didn't have to really get anybody else to buy into the idea of using this. But in terms of like working creatively with a journey and honing my craft, without getting better and stuff, I definitely have been an active member of the community. Ever since probably, I don't know, maybe early August, or something, late July, somewhere around there. I got enough, I generated enough images, I was wanting to kind of learn more about how to increase my my craftsperson, ship. And that's when I found the prompt craft channel on Discord. And I became a regular of that channel, and really learned a lot about how to just how to write better prompts and how to have more control over it. And and then I also, you know, as part of that, was helping to teach other people. And so yeah, it just became kind of a regular in that community. And, and then eventually, I, you know, I hit 10,000 images, and there's a channel for people who who've done the same. And so then that kind of became my new community trying to learn more advanced techniques. And and yeah, just continue to hone my, my craft more and more. And so yeah, I think that's, that's been a really valuable experience, because I've been able to learn from other people who are really advanced. And yeah, at that, as of now, a little over, I don't know, somewhere over 25,000 images, 26 Plus, I don't know something. And so I'm in the upper echelons now. So just really, really into it and have considered it a really valuable tool for my project. So. So yeah, I've gotten very good at it. And it's been really fulfilling and useful.
Watson Hartsoe  18:14
I yeah, I mean, I think I'm in the creeping up on the 5000 2000 Club. I just started using this probably a month ago. Okay, cool. I think I had seen it in during the summer and I had also gotten access to Dali at the time. And my initial, you know, take on them was like, these were like, all I didn't really understand prom craft at all, I sort of felt like, all everything on my journey ended up just looking kinda like fantasy concept art, like I didn't appreciate there were ways to vary the image. And I was like, oh, Dolly is great. But then I ended up spending so much money on it. So I don't know, if you've used any other tools or what you're saying, hey,
Joshua  18:56
yeah, I got an invite to Dali, but they wanted my phone number. And I didn't want to give it to him. So I basically just like waited a week or two weeks or something. And then like, sent him an email asking about it, stuff like that. And by the time I was like, ready to give it a shot again, I realized that like mid journey was doing a great job meeting my needs, and I just didn't need it. And so I kind of have like kept an eye on the other tools and solutions. And and yeah, I just keep coming back to mid journey because it it does such a good job. And I think the reason why it's there's multiple reasons why it's the right tool for me, but but I think the the biggest one is that I'm using this for concept design, and my specialty as a game developer. Oh, I want to I guess maybe one of a couple specialties is exploring new aesthetics in games. And the the stated goal, and I think it's proven out to be true of mid journey is two, or one of the three pillars, I guess you could say there's kind of three pillars, but one of them is in helping people to explore and develop new aesthetics. And so it fits perfectly with what I'm doing. So, yeah, like I said, there's multiple reasons, but that's, that's probably the biggest one. So yeah, I just I kind of have looked, haven't looked back in a sense, I think there are probably a couple, you know, specific uses, I could get out of stable diffusion, in terms of you know, like doing out painting, or in painting, a few specific, you know, parts of my mid journey images, you know, things like that, that are just really specialized in limited uses. But in terms of kind of the big, the big step of exploring new styles. And using AI generation for concept design, I think mid journey is easily the best. I have tried the new, stable, the fusion 1.5 using dream studio. And I just wasn't able to get the same quality images, as I could with mid journey, either. They weren't coherent, but they weren't, like, high style enough, I guess you could say, or they were in the right style. But it wasn't coherent enough. And mid journey was, could consistently do both. You know, like, for the prompt that I was testing at the time, I had like a 40% success rate with mid journey or something like that. And then I did a test with stable diffusion. And it was more like 5% or something, you know. So even though the image to image feature is really, really helpful. It's still Yeah, I just couldn't get good enough results to make it worth my time. But, um, but yeah, there are specific, you know, specific features that I think would, would work really well, that I can use in a focused way. So,
Watson Hartsoe  22:46
I mean, I'm, I'm just blown away with like, first off, like the fact that these like, sort of like hidden super user channels exist. I remember when I first thought, yeah, 1000 was like, that. Wasn't there a day ago? Like, what? How did I guess I mean, 1000 images? But like, yeah, just reflecting on? I mean, I don't know in prom craft. Have you met clarinet? I guess. Like one of the Yeah, yeah. I think we're such an interview interview, like maybe next Monday, but yeah, yeah. I mean, we could talk a lot about prom craft, I guess, more broadly, like, I think this thing that I'm really interested in that maybe you've talked about already, is like this tension between, like being super experimental, like the fact that we're like, 40%, success rate five versus 5%. And then like this other idea that, like, you're really unsure of what is out there, like you're unsure of the possibilities that are out there. And like, sometimes these accidental phrases can like, alert you to whole areas you weren't aware of. So like, yeah, maybe talking about, like the balance between being open to letting go of control and then also being like really rigorous, I guess. How do you how do you approach that?
Joshua  23:58
Yeah, great question. Yeah, so our our studio one of our specialties is innovation, you know, kind of in general sense. So we tend to have a more experimental mindset. Just you know, working day to day. But yeah, when it comes to this usually, kind of my my general process is if you think about like, well, I guess I'm not sure how familiar you are with like, art direction for Creative Media or whatever. But a common thing to do when you're trying to come up with a look at an art direction for a game or you know, you could you could apply this to animation or something as well, I suppose, is to essentially have like a mood board. have reference images. And and so I have, you know, a very thorough mood board reference image set for the game that I'm working on right now. And I had I had kind of inspirations and references already gathered for it. So that really helped me to, to have a place to start, when it came to, you know, exploring art direction with this tool, I could just prompt reference points for the game. So for example, Studio Ghibli films, was one inspiration for the art direction. Legend of Zelda was another one. Things like that. So, so yeah, like starting with that, that helps, because I already knew, you know, like, a vague direction or a vague concept to explore. And then from there, I just kind of would, would hone in further, you know, and a lot of times what would happen, like you were saying, I would, I would come up with this phrase, and try it out and realize that it was a really effective phrase to use. And once I found one of those, like something that was, was like, it had a fresh look, it fit the kind of vision that I had for the game already. And if I ran it a few times, it generated a bunch of like, really interesting and creative results. And I can kind of develop like a spidey sense, you know, an intuitive sense of like, Ooh, this is a good one, you know, and so once I, once I would find one of those, then I would, I would generate a bunch of images. With that. And kind of that whole process, sort of once I found a nugget, in a, kind of a more specific neighborhood that I wanted to explore in terms of design space, then I would like swap out different artists, I would try different combinations of artists mix with this phrase, I would try. You know, like, in the, in the case of doing environments, I would try different building types. I would try different character types. And, and so yeah, that, you know, with each with each, like combination, you want to generate a decent number of images. And then you want to try different combinations. And so it just kind of naturally results in generating a lot of images around the kind of like core phrase, you know, it's pretty easy to create several 100 Just around a single phrase. But there are ones you know, where I've created a couple 1000. And then like I said, the one, the one that I found for the environment art was over 10,000. So So yeah, I would kind of keep trying different combinations of things. And then eventually, for, especially for my character prompts and phrases, it would get to a point where I feel like, I felt like I was going in circles. And that's usually when it's like, okay, I feel like I've kind of thoroughly explored the, the design space for this concept, I can move on now, you know. So if you imagine like, a kind of fractal version of that, where you have your, your core phrase, and then you want to try like one artist with a core phrase. And then with that core phrase, plus the one artist, you can, you know, try different combinations of things on top of that, and then you get to the point where you realize like, Okay, this is certain kind of, to look all the same now. So now I'm going to switch out that one artist to go with the core phrase with a different kind of dominant artist or whatever. And, and then from there, just trying different combinations of things. And so So yeah, it's kind of like creating a mind map. You know, if you imagined the center of the Mind Map being the phrase, and then you want to have different branches off of that. And then it gets more and more nuanced and detailed, the farther you go away where you have lots of different sub nodes or whatever, of the tree. So, so yeah, that's kind of my, that's been my process for the most part, and, and then, you know, every, every now and then I'll just get bored, and I'll try something, you know, that's more, that's, like, less rational than that, you know. And that's, I feel like a good way to just kind of mix it up. Where to just try something even more experimental or, or nonsensical or something like that. And that's actually happening just recently, I created a really interesting character. And it just came from, like, I was trying to create a really interesting stylize. comic, kind of, like, you know, those explosions. In a comic that, like, in the old Batman comics would be like, bam, and there'd be kind of this explosion thing I was trying to make that I was trying to prop that, and in like, a stylized anime way. And it's really hard to do. I was struggling. But while working on that, I just kind of like, fell into a rabbit hole. And then I ended up creating a really interesting and stylized character. As a result, and then since then, I've tried to recreate it. But it's really hard to recreate. It's just a very, like, ephemeral you know, enigmatic thing that happened. But it was cool, though, because, you know, it came about from doing this like completely unrelated task, which is, you know, I feel like that's a pretty common creative thing, you know, you're pursuing some other unrelated thing, and then you stumble upon, hey, I can use this for this. This other thing I'm working on. So that's been fun to mix things up a bit to
Watson Hartsoe  32:12
the image we presented earlier. Combined with this, like the explosion, the like comic book explosion character, it made me sort of curious, like, whenever you're saying, like, core phrase, like, the other day, I was my mom, she's a kindergarten teacher. And like, we're writing these like little stories about people on the farm. And like, they wanted them in the style of Paw Patrol. But like, whenever Paw Patrol was mentioned, like, it took over any other words. So it was like a lot of what I wanted the core phrase to be, I couldn't get anything other than basically Paw Patrol, Paw Patrol was included. And it just made me think like, how are you going about establishing a core phrase finding a core phrase? Or, like, if you find an aesthetic you like, how do you recenter? How do you like push that aesthetic into the middle of that mind? Map? Is it?
Joshua  32:59
Yeah, it's, it's challenging for sure. I mean, there are some aesthetics that I can't intentionally lock in hone in on, I can only like stumble upon it in the middle of 30 or 40 images. And I just have to accept that I don't have that level of control, at least for that, you know, for that single aesthetic. So sometimes, there's, there's really nothing I can do. Or at least there's nothing I've been able to do to there's no technique I found yet. You know, it's there's theoretically, for a couple of them. Maybe I could figure out a way to do it. But But yeah, I think it's just, it's a little weird right now. Because, you know, the mid journey developers released this really high coherence model, which, you know, they called test or test P, they're both both technically the same. They're just kind of biased in different directions. But, um, but yeah, they released that. And that's has better results than stable diffusion, in my opinion, at least for the kind of work that I do. I guess, if I was just making, you know, Greg Rutkoski portraits are something maybe it wouldn't make much of a difference. But for me, like trying to be really inventive and creative with aesthetics and stuff. It's the best. But the downside being that it's kind of like a clue Gee system. And I'm not. I'm not being overly critical here. I'm kind of using the same sentiment that David the CEO has described him So in his office hours meetings and stuff, acknowledging completely that, that, you know, this was kind of like a temporary test, but everybody loved it so much that they've kept it around since. And so, yeah, we're kind of in this like awkward middle ground, in between, like an in between phase where they're working on the next generation model, that'll be a much better foundation. But meanwhile, we're just kind of using this temporary solution that's been kind of thrown together quickly. So yeah, there's, there's only so much you can do, if you want that kind of like high quality image from the test model. But within that, there are definitely some prompt craft type tricks you can use and techniques. So sometimes it's just like reordering the prompt. And knowing that when you create punctuation that acts as like, a kind of distance between the words, and so you can add more punctuation, you can move the words around, sometimes you have to create a counterweight against like a really strong phrase, by coming up with another phrase or another word that like has a little bit of weight to it as well. So that that one, you know, like you said, Paw Patrol, you'd probably need some other artists reference or cultural reference or something to balance against AVS troll so that it doesn't just overwhelm the whole aesthetic. And so yeah, just being able to like experiment and trying to figure out which words in which phrases are really strongly weighted, because I have noticed that there are some that I use that are really strongly weighted, so I always try to move them to the end of a prompt. For, you know, just come up use other reference concepts that I can balance against it. And then the other thing is now that we have remix ability, the ability to, you know, kind of transition from one prompt to a new prompt, I feel like that's another really helpful tool to have in your tool belt. So that you could say, start with a image that is not at all in the style of Paw Patrol. And then you could remix it into a prompt where Paw Patrols at the end. And then once you remix, it'll kind of start to move in that direction, but then it wouldn't completely overwhelm it. So, so yeah, there's definitely some techniques and tricks and stuff you can do. But from my experience, there's some things that you just kind of have to accept that you don't have complete control yet. This early with the technology. So
Watson Hartsoe  38:28
yeah, I mean, it's really fast. And I mean, I just love watching people use it just like watch, you know, people's, the evolution of a prompt, somebody's trying to get to an image and you're trying to figure out how they're wrestling with this idea in their head, or how, what the, the AI is giving them and I think like sometimes I wonder, to what extent is like ProvoCraft, sort of like superstitious like some of these like, you know, HD octane high render, like people just have, yeah, these are the words that deliver the results. And they got one or two and they've never questioned that idea, or Oh, yeah, yeah, I mean, I think that as as things change, and as you're describing it, like being in between things, like, I wonder to what extent is everybody sort of stuck in this, that you're building a skill, but the skills foundation is sort of like ever shifting and you have to be Yeah, super, like, aware of what I don't know how you're using words or the power that words have or I don't know how you approach it.
Joshua  39:29
Yeah. Yeah, that's really interesting that you bring that up, because there is there is definitely a level of superstition and confirmation bias. And yeah, it's really easy to get convinced of some reality that just isn't true. And it's extremely hard to like, accept that is just not true. The most common thing I feel like is like, Oh, I swear that the way that this generates images has changed. You know that, like, they must have made some updates to the model based on the images I'm creating? Nope, no, it's just like, if you, you know, flip a coin and you get five heads in a row, the next coin that you flip is not more likely to be tails than any other flip. You know? And. And so yeah, that, that's really hard. And then the other thing is you Oh, yeah, when it comes to like, the words that you use. They do have some weight, from my experience. But it's just not very much. So from what I can tell, the things that have the most impact on like, kind of the visual result is, if your prompting source data, kind of like what you said, if it's like a strongly weighted term. For example, if you want like a really, photorealistic image, there are like multiple things you should do before you write the word photorealistic. And in fact, photorealistic is often a word that you want to avoid. Because that's used for like a painting or something that's otherwise not a photograph, to say that it's like approaching or pointing toward a photograph, you know. And so what's much better to use is some kind of term that references a set of data. That is high quality photographs, for example, miniatures, miniatures have a lot of high quality data, like photographic data, and like saying film still from whatever film using, like museum display, or something like that, you know, like referencing large datasets of something that's really photographic memorabilia, things like that. And then, of course, there are like, artists who are either photographers or photo real artists, or whatever. And prompting them would be probably the second most. I don't know, second, strongest impact. And then from there, if you were to prompt like, photography, lighting setups, or film stock, or, you know, lens types, or whatever. I feel like that's probably the next dominant thing. And then last one, is this the stuff that people seem to get obsessed with, which is like, like, 4k HD, you know, whatever thing. And I mean, I do have that in some of my prompts. But I acknowledge that it's like, I kind of use it to get from 95% to 97%, instead of from like zero to 90, which I think is what people a lot of times will think that it does. But really, now it's the, it's the other things that you should use as your foundation. And that's just like, kind of like, adding sprinkles onto a doughnut or something. You know, it's just the frosting. And so yeah, but I have found that it makes a little bit of a difference, you know, it's kind of like creating an image and then you, you add some words, because you want to add a little bit of sharpening to the image, you know, like in Photoshop, use unsharp mask, you can't build an entire image isn't sure mask. So you just kind of like take your existing image, and then you can sharpen it a little bit. So that's been my experience with that kind of thing. But yeah, it is it is easy to get superstitious about it. And the other thing that's a little confusing for people I think is the way that my journey works is a lot different than stable diffusion or dolly. Were with stable, the fusion especially. It really does help if you just throw in tons of words like that. Because it's so Like, by default, it's not very, it's not tuned to aesthetics. It's kind of untuned in a sense. So it'll output very, like, you know, clipart stuff, or stock photos, or, you know, everyday smartphone photo, what have you. And so for those, you really do need all those words. So if you've been like spending, you know, weeks using stable diffusion, and then you come to the journey, of course, you're going to be tempted to make to write 100 word prompts, that are full of award winning Behance, Artstation, whatever. Because that does actually have an impact with stable conditions. So So yeah, I think, I do think that is a thing being becoming kind of superstitious and. And it's Yeah, it is, it's hard to sometimes it's hard to accept the pure science of it, you know, that you really are just like, exploring something with a lot of random, chaotic variation. And as much as you want to assign a pattern to it, you can't. And there have definitely been, you know, there's like, I go back and forth, whether I believe that it's actually true, but there's kind of like conspiracy theory, in the mid journey community that I and a few other people talk about a lot, which is whether your prompts, your previous prompts, leak into new prompts. And this comes about because like, if you're working on something in it, you're you're inserting very specific details into the image. And then you're prompting something that's really different later on. And then those specific details, make it into your new images, even though you didn't prompt them at all. It's extremely tempting to think that there's some kind of weird leak. And so I've had things like that, where it just, it just seems like it's beyond typical variation. Because it's a very, very specific detail that ends up in a new image that has no place, you know, like, it's not even remotely related. And yet, it ends up there. And then you're just it's so tempting to think like, somehow my previous prompts are influencing these. I don't know how, but it's, it's doing it. So that I don't know, the word is still out. But right now, it's just kind of like a funny, funny conspiracy theory. But it's very tempting for sure.
Watson Hartsoe  47:55
I mean, even you're just mentioning magical prompts for me, like, unlock something that I think I had been seeing, but I hadn't really put it as being like this, like magic thinking associated with the tool, which is in the Gulf of like, explainability. Like, where the AI doesn't explain itself. It's unclear how it processed your prompt. There's some gap and understanding there, people that end with magic, or they will actually use the word magic very intentionally to try to generate something that's unexpected, or, or interesting. So, yeah, yeah, I guess like, to what extent is this really just like aI lagging and being able to be understood by people? Or like the actual Enix inexplicable ability of these, like giant model sets? Like, will it get better? Or is this actually going to get worse over time as these algorithms get even bigger and bigger and more and more complicated?
Joshua  48:51
Yeah, I mean, I can, I can only say, I can only take David the CEO majority, I can only take him at his word that in the short term, it's definitely going to get better. The next version, that's that the last office hours he made it sound like it was coming out pretty soon is definitely going to be not only more coherent, but also more creative. And then the there's a version after that, that's going to be even better. And, and so I don't know, I believe I don't really have any reason. Not too at this point. But in the long term. That is a very good question. I really don't know. Yeah, I don't know. But I do think that the approach, that mid journey is taking into the long term is to focus on community and then leverage that community to help tune future models because they're getting to the point where with their Are you no team of just a handful of people, they can't realistically tune the, the system the models to be any better than they are, you know, it's kind of the limits of human ability. So when you hit the limit of human ability, you have to go superhuman. And, you know, the idea of there being that you, you get a million people, and a million people working together could increase the quality. So but, you know, that's never been done before, at least not in this domain. So who knows what will happen? But, but yeah, it'll be interesting. definitely interesting to see them try. Because that's absolutely where they're headed. Yeah, I think, you know, when it comes to the magical thinking thing, I kind of think about it in terms of like, peaks, like mountain tops. Where are like, you know, the, the computer science and word would be low local maxima, versus a global maxima or what have you. That yeah, like, you know, you're you're prompting, you're kind of experimenting with different things. And then you come upon this phrase, and you realize, oh, this phrase is like, at the top of a mountain peak. But you don't know, you can't really see if it's the highest peak around you, or if there's like an even taller one right next to you. So you just kind of have to wander around. And hope that you learn something in the process. You know, regardless of what it is, whether it's Nope, this is the tallest peak around me, or whether you realize, oh, like I thought this phrase was good. I just need to change this one word to something else. And it's even better, you know? And so yeah, I feel like that's just it feels like a natural process of using this tool. Is this having that kind of? Yeah, just that kind of like mindset and willingness to experiment and try different combinations of things. Because yeah, we just don't, we don't know too much about how it works. Yet. There's no way to know, like, how influential a specific phrase is, you know, in relation to kind of variant phrases around it or whatever, you know, it's like, theoretically crazy analysis you can do. It's just, yeah, I just can't do that right now. So I feel like experimentation is, that's the best way for now. So
Watson Hartsoe  53:04
I love that image that I really, I really resonated with me of like, you find a word that and you're like, oh, wow, this is the word but then you're like, unclear about what's beyond that. Alternatively, like, you could be like, Oh, this is a this is like a crap made up nothing phrase. It's like down in the ditch. And then there's like, little gyms and stuff hidden in it. And you're like, I had no idea stuff was down here. Yeah, I mean, like, I guess, understanding it is one thing, like, I like go to the office hours pretty much every week. And like, also, feeling that like, David's very forthright, and like open when, where they're at and where the team's goals are. And I'm pretty much in awe that like, he's just accepting everybody's questions. And so, you know, he has like, great patience. But yeah, I think that. Yeah, I mean, like, Are there any harms that come from this experimentation or there's some other people working on this research that are really fascinated by people's trying to get around like word filth, like banned words, find prompts that are, you know, that aren't banned, but shouldn't be banned. And I guess, I don't know if you've come across that at all, or have any thoughts on on like, the potential harms of this?
Joshua  54:21
Um, yeah, I mean, there are people who get pretty upset about the filters, and they use the word censorship, which I feel like is kind of abuse, abuse of that word. But I guess in a sense, it's censorship. But yeah, they get they get upset about it, and I, I see what they're saying. But I think they are failing to think systemically, and they're failing to think at the scale that this actually exists. And so, I have this, like, nightmare scenario. So, you know, I, for the last several years, I've been studying machine learning. And, you know, Nvidia, put out their paper, where they trained all these images, and you could, you know, you could generate a photorealistic face, you wouldn't be able to tell that's a fake person, right? It's just a completely made up face. And then not only that, but they showed a demo, where they can move a slider around, and like change, you know, very quickly, the features of the face. And it was mind blowing. And so that like, that, I could easily extrapolate to something like, you know, the tools that we have now from from there. But I have this nightmare scenario, in my mind of kind of the, the 2023 version of a Nigerian email scam, which is that somebody finds person online, they find like, images of them or their loved ones. And then they create a virtual fake kidnapping of somebody, because they can just, you know, slap their face on in a prompt, they can essentially somehow prompt somebody's face, train a model, you know, you can already do that. Now with Dream booth. It's just like a stable diffusion variant, where you can, you know, grab a handful of images, somebody's face, and then put their face on a warrior or whatever. So my nightmare scenario is like, instead of on a warrior, it's like, Polaroid, you know, whatever smartphone images of somebody being held captive, and, you know, like, they've got a bloody nose or whatever. And it would be very convincing, you know, to the everyday person that they got an email saying, like, Hey, I have so and so you better send me some money. And that's kind of my nightmare scenario. And, with, with this software, especially at the scale, that mid journey operates, it's not just that, like, you can already do that. Now, if you hire a professional photo editor to Photoshop something for you, you know, so you could, you could argue that, like, oh, anybody can do that now. But the difference is that the people who can use mid journey to create something like that only need to know basic English, you know, like very rudimentary, like human intelligence that, you know, a 10 year old can have very, like little money, access, all they need is access to discord. And, and then, you know, just a few images that random images of somebody that you could find on the internet. And then in like, 60 seconds, they could end up with, with an image, and not just like one image, but every 60 seconds, they could generate one of those images. And then of course, now there's however many millions of users, I mean, there's 3 million users plus just on the discord, but, but presumably, multiple times that in general, and so just imagine, like, 10 million people generating one of those images once every minute. You know, like, that's the total potential destructive power that this has. So, so yeah, I think they're, they're absolutely right on, and they're taking the right approach that, that you need to be really careful because it's just so, so powerful. And, and I haven't, you know, there was this, this time period of a couple of days where they released the the quote, unquote, beta model, you know, this is right before the test one. And you can easily get around filters and stuff, or even earlier, I guess, you know, before they put in the gore filters, that you could generate really disturbing, realistic and gory imagery of celebrities and stuff like that, and I didn't see those images, but I can imagine, you know, you only once you get to like the 20th extremely disturbing image that you see you're like, Okay, that's enough, you know, we this can exist like period. So So yeah, I think it's, I think it's really reasonable. And like you said, you know, some kindergarten teacher wants to use it, or fourth grade teacher, whatever, you're not gonna want 5% I still blows my mind 5% of the dataset is porn and stable diffusion. And so you can just like prompt, you know, like, oh, I want a young girl playing chess or whatever, and then end up getting like this naked teenage girl, you know, like, it's just, it's so disturbing. And I mean, it's when, when the datasets like that, it's just a natural result, you know, there's no ill will on the part of the data. Like, the, the model, I mean, excuse me. And, and it's just gonna, it's just treats it as a style, you know, it's just applying a style to a person. So, yeah, I think, I think it's, I'm, I'm all for their approach, I think they're doing the right thing. And I think if you think about the, the real power of it, and the fact that like a million people could be doing something every minute, you're gonna want to be a lot more careful about what you let those 1 million per minute people do. So it's, yeah, it's just a whole other scale. It's so so easy to do, you know, and I feel like, it just puts it into a different category altogether, than like, hiring an image editing expert, you know?
Watson Hartsoe  1:01:43
Yeah, I don't want to dwell too long on the destructive potential of this, because I'm really interested in the generative potential. But I guess I do see a few other areas. I'm curious about what you think, for example, copyright issues? I don't know if that's a, I don't have any opinions on or Oh,
Joshua  1:02:00
for sure. Yeah, I think so. I do, like, I hire artists, I, you know, I'm more of an of a director and designer, now, I used to be a production artist. So I've been in that situation myself. And then of course, you know, I, I hire them production artists and work with them regularly. So I really care about ownership, like, artists ownership. And part of me is bothered by the fact that you can just like scrape 100 images of some artists and then recreate their style. That is disturbing level of power. However, I think I mean, it's been, it's been ruled legally, that it's fair use to train a model using that data, okay. And then people were putting their stuff online. And there's a certain, I feel like just the way that internet culture has evolved, is that when you post your stuff online, you're kind of inherently giving up a certain level of control over it. And then, and as it has turned out, when you do that, it seems like the culture of humanity benefits as a whole, even though you kind of lose something relative to pre internet days. And so like for our game, you know, we developed this game That Dragon Cancer and is very, very emotionally difficult game. And then, of course, just like, happens with any game that has any level of notoriety, people play it and post videos of themselves on YouTube. And so we had over 20 million like views of, of our game being played. But if you compare to other games that have had over 20 million views, we didn't have nearly a number of sales. So like, commercially, we really suffered. Because people could just watched a video of somebody, you know, their favorite YouTube personality playing instead of playing themselves. And so we, we got hurt by that, but, and that, you know, that was painful. But I think it's still an net positive for internet culture. In order to allow that kind of thing, because it's just part of like sharing creativity and sharing it Um, human experience, you know, and especially for that kind of game, just being able to create a forum, in a general sense, in like the YouTube comments that people sharing, like, you know, my dad died from cancer or just sharing their stories of, of what they've gone through, we realized that it was very much worth it. And that it's probably better to, to just like, treat that kind of thing as, as a, like, less commercial endeavor, that it's better to just accept the downsides from it. And kind of come in to it from the get go with less of a commercial mindset. And so my experience with that has taught me that there are broader gains to be made other than like, you know, being hurt as an individual. And so when it comes to this sort of thing, being able to, you know, have this technology at your fingertips, I think it's the same thing, it's going to be a net win for the society in general, but especially the creative community. You know, if you're, if you're an artist, you can use this to help speed up parts of the process of doing your own work. And, and I think, yeah, I think in the end, it's better that it exists than not. And I think the worries over you know, what this will do to kind of everyday working freelance artists are overblown. Because it's just like any other advance in technology, you know, like, from my perspective, as a game developer, I'm thinking about, like, what a triple A studio would think about this, if they can knock $100,000 off of their art production budget. What they would most likely do is just to build a world that's $100,000 bigger. And that's an every, every single advance in like, the technology of game development that increases productivity. That's exactly what they've done. And, and not only that, but they even increased the scale of the games, beyond just the productivity increases, you know? And so, so yeah, I think I'm not worried. I think the the main thing is, there's probably a minority of people who aren't willing to use this tool. Who will essentially be replaced by those who are willing. That sucks for sure. But it's also what always happens. I mean, that's just, that's just life. That's to say, that's every every technological advance, that's what happens. So, because of that, I've adopted the attitude that, that I should have a more open mind and be more willing to embrace these new tools, and stuff like that, the thing that I think is going to be the biggest change, to me, this points toward the death of IP ownership more generally. Not that it's going to completely go away. But the internet has already pushed it in the direction of you owning your stuff less, like I said, you post something on the internet, you just need to accept the fact that you have less control over it, period. Because people are gonna, they're gonna create fan art of it, they're gonna remix it, you know, they're going to add their own little twist on it. Because it's so much easier to do. And so this technology makes that like, you know, at least 10 times easier to do, if not more. So I think as a result, it's just gonna happen even more than it already does. And so like, one scenario that I have, in my mind is Marvel is announcing their new movie. And they realize that if they can release an image set of like 20 images of some new character from different angles, that people will use those 20 images as a training set. And now they're able to insert that character in all sorts of random, you know, situations. They can insert them into an old Marvel movie if they want to, you know, and then by the time we get video, which of course is inevitable and already on its way, they're going to be able to put a video version of that character in some old movie. And yes, Marvel gave up, you know, a certain level of control by releasing that dataset. But in exchange, they get, you know, 50 million impressions or whatever. And so, once they realize that, that, Oh, if we just give up a little bit of control, we generate all these impressions, they're totally going to do that, like, that's exactly, that's exactly what they're going to do. And so, and in fact, that already happens, because you go to some kind of anime comic book convention or whatever. And everybody there is dressed up as some character, and in a sense of violating copyright of whatever, you know, media, but it's deemed fair use, because they're being creative. And they're, you know, they're not. They're kind of like, adding to the culture, you know, by doing that, and I think that this technology is, is just going to be another big step. That's gonna push that even farther. So. So yeah, I think society isn't ready for it. But it's definitely pointing toward like, like strict IP ownership is just going to be less and less relevant over time. Once you're able to just like, start making your own videos of random stuff, it's just going to become going to become quite a bit less important. So that's going to be a huge change. I mean, it could be 1020 years from now, but But I do think that being able to experience the power of this technology firsthand, that's absolutely where things are heading, you know, you'll be able to make your you can take your whatever Netflix show, and you can just like swap out a character. Now, I'm fully expecting that that'll be a thing someday.
Watson Hartsoe  1:12:10
Yeah, and I think I think that, yeah, that opens that opens up my mind to think differently about, you know, the role that these big studios might play in having this be something that they actually promote. I think that's such an interesting idea, like 20 different poses, suddenly, you know, Captain America is everywhere, you know, Burger King, or something. But I think more generally, I'm really curious how you think about maybe like, the layers of ownership that come with this, because one thing I've also seen that's kind of curious is like, when people do you find these, like, special sauces, or secret sauces for prompts, like, some people are very protective of those and don't want to share them, even though, you know, it's built off of, you know, however many billion other creative outputs from someone else. So it's just curious to see like, maybe if IP does become more of a common, where people do decide to protect themselves, or where IP then becomes like, you know, people have different places where they then set up their property. So I don't know if that's something you've come across, like, working with other high level users have mid journey, like I imagined, sometimes they want to keep their secrets, you know, secret, and sometimes they want to be very open and share. But I don't know if there's been one side or the other that you've you found more of?
Joshua  1:13:32
Yeah, that's a good question. I mean, I definitely land somewhere in the middle. Part of my, like, they're definitely I, I tend to be a little more secretive with my prompts. Just because I'm generating images for this project. And we haven't, we haven't announced the project, we haven't really shared imagery from it at all. And so I basically just want some, I want an exclusivity period, over my prompts, essentially. Now, with that said, there are some that I've used that it's not, it's not obvious that it's for this project. And so I've just like published a ton of character, character design images that I've done on my profile. So there was like, one day, it just didn't matter, an hour that I released, like, you know, 500 images or something like that. So I have definitely shared some stuff. And usually, you know, people's interest in a prompt is in learning. So then I focus on teaching, but not like just giving them my prompt, you know, kind of like explaining the principles. And then usually, if I reference like a couple artists, I'll tell them that But yeah, there might be like a couple of words or a phrase or something that I, that I essentially redact. So I'm trying to like be as helpful as I can, but still have kind of an exclusivity over my most valuable discoveries, and developments. And so but yeah, from my experience with the 25,000 Club, is that there's a, there's a kind of like, unspoken etiquette to not liking badger people for their prompt. And there are some people who are a lot more open and willing to share that do. But then, like, the general we can call it the like, common thing that will happen is kind of like what I just said, where somebody will give you like, some of the details. But not all of them. So but I mean, by and large, though, like, people don't generally ask each other for their prompts. And I'm assuming that's kind of, like, out of mutual respect. of, you know, like, assuming that the person if they don't share that they're not terribly interested in sharing the exact prompt. But But yeah, there's, it's more of like, sharing a little trick or specific artists reference or, you know, things like that. And I feel like that's like a pretty normal, career creative thing to do. You know, like, once you get to a certain level, you don't even really need to ask somebody their specific prompt. Because really, what you're, what you're interested in, is like some principle, and a lot of times the high level users aren't afraid to share the principal part. So So yeah, I feel like it's it just kind of like works itself out. Once you get to a high enough level, and I that's been like, even in games, you know, same thing. I feel like that's a common thing. I mean, I guess, source code is maybe a little bit different. I feel like code. Yeah, it just, it's a little bit of a different beast. But. But yeah, like, in a creative sense. It just, this feels fairly normal to me, kind of how that how that works once you get to the higher level clubs. So. But it is cool, though, like, somebody will be experimenting with something and they'll make a discovery. And then they'll Absolutely, like, share and talk about the discovery. And I've done that as well. So, so yeah, that people definitely do that. Which again, I feel like is a relatively normal thing. So
Watson Hartsoe  1:18:11
yeah, I think you had mentioned a few other people like making discoveries, or you'd mentioned at skies as a user who had I don't know who they are, I was trying to find them. Because I was like, Well, I would love to talk to more people who are using this at a high level, experimenting with like, control or lack of control, and scope, discovering things. I mean, I think that that experience is something I'm amazed whenever I see it, I'm a mix whenever I happens to me, and just hearing other people talk about it, it's like, wow, this is opening up whole new doors. So
Joshua  1:18:45
yeah. There are definitely a handful of users that I can that I can point you to I can't speak to their availability for an interview but um, but there's Yeah, there's definitely a handful of people that I can I can just type out their usernames, I suppose or hear a screenshot of some people and that you could just ask so there I just said to high level users so CG CG playground will show up on the on the majoring discord they'll show up as nukes. And okay, Z, I think
Watson Hartsoe  1:19:48
I think I've seen that that picture.
Joshua  1:19:50
Yeah. And yeah, so those, those are definitely is like, and then there's another person, Ignite. You know, like light something on fire Ignite and that their their avatar is, I think a male face. That's maybe looking up a little bit it almost looks like Leon, Leon The Professional, whatever I can remember the actor's name now but looks vaguely like that. But yeah, Ignite would be another person. That's like a high level regular. So the 20 brooder sprinters a person who's like really experimental and tries like crazy. Just crazy things all the time. Like probably the person who's done the most, like D mastering and remastering into different versions and stuff. And just like, yeah, Golden Cross is somebody who I think of them as like the David Bowie. This, like, if if it turned out to be that that person was actually an alien, it would make perfect sense. But extremely talented, but then also does like really silly, funny things. Anyway, yeah, they're all super talented, high level regulars. So,
Watson Hartsoe  1:21:29
no, this is so helpful. Thank you. Thank you. I was gonna ask, do you know if there's other? Like, are you in sort of the vanguard of this with the 25,000? Group? Or are there more even more? I mean, like, the, suddenly it's like, how deep does this rabbit hole go?
Joshua  1:21:48
Yeah, it's, I believe there's, there's maybe only like, I want to say there's less than 100 of us in that club. There's less than 100 people at that level. So yeah, I mean, presumably, there could be a couple people who, like aren't on the mid journey. Discord, you know, that are like, I don't know, like lone wolf, people that are totally disconnected from everyone, you know, but I feel like that's like, almost by definition, that's an outlier example. Anyway. So really, when you're asking that question, I feel like you're asking, like, who are people who are actually involved in the community, and like, even small Lee in even, like a little bit of a meaningful way? Who are like high level users? And when you define it that way, then yeah, there's like, less than 100 people. And in terms of the people who are like, active on the mid journey, Discord, and who like, share ideas, who interact with each other, who, you know, just like, our good community citizens, then yeah, that's that there's, like 30 people or something? Total. But certainly, like, the ones in this list, the seven of us plus a few other people, you know, that's probably your list right there. So
Watson Hartsoe  1:23:20
are these people professionals who are using discord, or using mid journey in like a professional capacity, or are really just avid explorers,
Joshua  1:23:29
it's a mix. So most of the people from what I can tell most of the people use, I should say, I should qualify that a little more. Most of the people who are really high level users who are pretty active, use it at least a little bit for work in some capacity in some professional sense. And, but you know, some people, it's like more of a hobby than others. So for me, like, you know, 99 plus percentage of my usage has been in a professional capacity. It just, I'm more experimental with it, you know. But then there are other people who, you know, they use it for like 5% or 10% of the usages for work or something. But it does seem just kind of from my you know, like reading random side comments and stuff that most of the active high level users use it professionally, at least a little bit. So
Watson Hartsoe  1:24:41
yeah, it reached out to some people who I saw were making tabletop games with it. Oh, cool. Yeah, yeah, we had some six. Because I guess the argument is like, it's a race to the bottom for making art for those like, you want to make as much art as possible for the least. Other than that, I've talked to a graphic designer I started using it, who's honestly more of like, an influencer graphic designer? So I think was like more just promoting it than like really honestly using it. But yeah, so far, yeah, just trying to find people who are really thinking about it becoming a part of a professional practice is something that I'm so curious about, because I don't know, like, I'm in this, like, HCI program. And the sense I get is, there's some people in this master's program who are like really tuned into this and are following it really closely. And doing really advanced experiments with like, stable diffusion, or, or all the different tools. And I think you had said something before that kind of stuck with me, it's like, probably, like, this is going to, you know, disrupt a lot of professional industries. And it's like, you know, who who's learning it first, I don't know, if they get advantage, or if it's just like, everybody eventually gets access, and everybody's using this stuff, or, I don't know, like, what the future really looks like, or I think that what you said to have, like, people will just spend that extra money on, you know, expanding scope or quality or, you know, ambition and new places, but it's, yeah, I mean, I don't know, like in terms of leadership, it's so interesting to see, you know, David speak each week, seeing these, you know, super users. It's also I mean, yeah, like, do you look to anybody in particular for, like, the path forward, even outside of the discord community?
Joshua  1:26:30
Um, hmm. I mean, I, every, every now and then, I'll come across, you know, some new experiment, or demo or whatever. There's been a ton of development with stable diffusion, you know, being open source. People are always making like, cool demos and stuff. So yeah, that's, that's been interesting to see. But otherwise, not really. I mean, I've, I've keep, I feel like I keep myself busy just trying to use mid journey to discover new things, you know, like, there's, there's just so much potential with it. And then now with REMAX, like, there's so much you can do with it. And I feel like it's, that's valuable enough. And so, yeah, and I, you know, being in like, the 10,000 club, or 25,000 Club, like people will post links to interesting stuff they see anyway. So I don't need to like, I feel like I if there's some cool news thing, I'll end up finding out about it. Somehow. So. Yeah, I think. Yeah, I feel I feel satisfied. For now, I don't need to, like, go out of my way to really stay up to date on stuff. Because I feel like this is this is new enough. You know, there are very few number of people in the world who are probably using this technology at this level. So
Watson Hartsoe  1:28:24
yeah, yeah, I again, can't thank you enough for making time to talk to me. And it's like, again, it's very inspiring, and very energizing to like, you know, continue with this research, but also continue with mid journey. And yeah, I think it's like, for me, it comes in waves where I'll sit down and I'll, like, do a few 100 images. But then I realized, like, it's kind of nice to just do them throughout the day. And then like, you come back to it at the end of the day, and you liked the ones like you're able to, you know, build off of them. But yeah, yeah, I think I'll look out for you in office hours. And definitely keep you up to date on the nature of this research. So you can decide if you want to be named or not. Sure. Yeah. Cool. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. Well, I was gonna the last thing for interviewing clarinet. Do you have any tips or any questions or things you think we should talk about? I know, it's like prompt craft one on one in some regards. But
Joshua  1:29:21
um, no, I just think the, the thing that sets clarinet apart from other people in the community is interaction with the development team. There are a few people that have interacted with the development team directly. I mean, there's like mods and guides, but clarinets, like a person who kind of is like in the modern guide community, but is also a high level creator. Like relative The active high level creator, you know what I mean? Or at least, if you think about it in the recent sense, I guess I'm not sure. Maybe, you know, if there's mod guy duties that you know, that like, are changing things in the last week or something, you know, but as of you know, thinking about it over the last several months, it's a person who's like an active creator, they're an active, like, mod guide person. And then somebody who's like, asked the development team directly specific questions. So I think that's a unique perspective, for sure. Because there aren't that many people. I mean, there, those of us who like, are doing kind of citizen science research type stuff, with varying levels of scientific rigor, and clarinets, a kind of person who has like, found a way to talk to the development team more directly than most other people. So as a result, like being able to get a more official development team answers and insights and stuff, which of course, benefits all community because a lot of that ends up on like a prompt craft forum thread, you know. So it's definitely, that's a person who's really a leader in the community in terms of like, teaching and also kind of leads the, like, prompt, craft, volunteer helper group. You know, there's some, some people who are like willing to just help in a, I don't know, just like active users, I level users who are have learned stuff and want to share and clarinet leads a lot of them. So yeah, that's the that's definitely the unique perspective clarinet provides shambles and other person that comes to mind. That's currently working on a book for using mid journey, and has released the first few chapters, I believe. So yeah, if there was like, a, like, legitimate MIDI high quality book that someone was gonna put out. SHAN bibble would probably be at the top of the list because it's, yeah, seems to be in in the works right now. *
	Chapter 1
??%5
yg?%
	Transcribed by https://otter.ai*
$EE0339D5-7B2C-4996-9032-0749E721CB32
https://otter.ai/
decimal
mXkA
$2412CF45-2C0F-4E15-AAAB-F407CF0222C0
starting expectation
$415F232F-3592-419F-BFB4-C725CC28DF11
acommunity feed as a beginning learning space for new users to pick up on patterns of prompt craft
$8B6D88D2-45EF-4CFD-A7BA-12211CC1D67C
FFeel of language of prompting
shock of entering the newbie
s channel
$41A0CF11-A619-4D92-AEAB-266D510F9B3C
What pushes users past this initial feeling of being overwhelemed? What makes them stick with it and begin to see how to use the platform more efficientlly?  How is this learning curve navigated differently by different users?
$90677F18-9CA1-4E8E-B3A5-8ECECECBBBF3
Midjourney as liquid imagination
Midjourney as a hive mind
these are two metaphors that David, the founder has spoken about before in office hours.
$A0844190-B61A-4C36-BD25-75DBEC714AE3
MJ is a place without clear rules.  The idea of it being the wild west gives it a sort of wild natural sentiment that is echoed in discussions of the scale of the platform posing a threat.
$2F1B96BB-5509-442E-B1CA-053FF58614CA
community feed is a place where the norms of prompt craft are established and the language of the AI is held in the light of what of what the "hive mind" of MJ finds valuable.
$2D185D70-72D1-4B91-AF3A-9FE8825E8ED7
[What prerequisite abilities allow a user to accelerate in learning prompt craftspersonship?
$598BC194-5A1D-4C06-ABF9-DCD82A32A6F1
2Low expectations coming in to using the technology
$7C2BC80A-A3FD-46E7-8873-4A86AF97F4BB
Z"Magical prompt" first experience of discovery on MJ opens up a sense of new possibilities
$47DFB168-0D73-4DA0-854E-78321BF17D0E
/approaching game design problems through the AI
$458F328B-4EA3-416F-92DB-9FACC581F539
Aesthetic as a central game mechanic that communicates affordance to players.  It was interesting to see how Joshua framed his profession in terms that was p
$1E38BF3D-AFB1-4FE3-A820-95ABCC0AB2F5
OMJ delivers insight that was not possible from previous ideation/design process
$FEF51822-236E-43FB-A612-25E753C65C5A
RThis tool was perceived to be an enhancement to a process now becomes the process.
$DB2B5B04-174C-4B4D-8BA5-6D479068BA7E
Magical prompt
One phrase is used to explore a huge possibility space.  What level of capacity is required to explore this many images practically and creatively?
$7E08F4E7-F7DE-4F2C-9DBC-EA88D89920A1
Midjourney creates a new style
$AD13EA58-2D7D-45F5-95CD-841569743A66
a finished rendering short circuited Joshua's creative workflow.  Instead of moving through sketches he was able to jump straight to a completed aesthetic.  
$E713BE80-926A-4379-88E1-1995E4344C6F
How do designers deal with this new sense of freedom and possibility?  Has past technology similarily expanded the possibilities of design space?
$983ECF8D-0100-41CE-824F-7ED9131EB68F
MJ changed Joshua
s creative workflow, but as the algorithm shifts and the community matures will these changes stick?  How will they be formalized?
$4A7C9B25-AECC-4297-B86F-9B3B903A765C
active member of the community
$5FB9D9EC-194A-452C-A62C-FD1551D4006E
Joshua became a regular in the prompt craft channel and was able to progress his prompotcrafting skills quickly.  This is interesting to see because it shows how focused Joshua was on his project and improving the outputs of MJ even when he was still a new user. 
$971B4ACD-BA53-43AE-A2CD-272783F33DDD
Joshua mentions that he became a regular in the 10,000 super user channel.  This is interesting because there are a number of other superuser channels before that one that he didn
t mention.  It
s worth noting that these more exclusive channels might provide certain users with exponential gains in their prompt craft further separating them from the general community and reinforcing a sense of commitment to promptcraft specifically and MJ in general.  
		'3~
$54612042-8911-48A0-BC5D-883F65779FB8
s interesting to see how Joshua is both taking value from the outputs of MJ as well as his role in the community and his skill in using the tool.  
$8FAD5AD1-EAFA-48D9-93A7-FF2D0E294EAB
The value of MJ to Joshua is resonate with the explicitly stated goals of MJ in exploring new aesthetics.  In the realm of aesthetic possibility it is clear that not all aesthetics are created in value vacuums.  It is interesting to consider that certain values are permitted to be explored while others are limited, blocked, or not ever thought about by the community or the development team.  
$0CBBD0E5-8C0E-42E1-8947-14EED9FC2619
In comparing the results of MJ and Stable Diffusioni t is interesting that Joshua is so rigorous and quantitiative in his analysis.  This contrasts with how he was talking about the happy accidents in discovering a magical prompt.  If there
s is some test that an algorithm is given about being 
right
 what room is there for the AI to surprise the user?
$B262567C-B6D9-4380-A91C-7544FFE8ED4E
s interesting to see how easily it was for Joshua to link his existing creative practices to the new affordances of the AI.  This is interesting because it creates a precedent for interfacing MJ with existing design practices.  
$3FFEEC5F-9A4D-4635-BCC9-8CEF63EC70F5
Spidey Sense
Intuitive sense
It is interesting that this ability to understand the possibilities of the AI is described as a new sense.  It
s interesting because it
s unclear where or how this skill is developed other than through practice.  
$1A136F7D-7C2D-49A8-9B86-C484E7EF5D99
The image of a network or tree is compelling in thinking about how prompts are composed.  As words have different weights it
s interesting to imagine how different creators come to understand the core concepts that are being rendered by the AI.
$9CC77D1E-4F0B-46A4-A30A-6168D119A087
Creative process as a stumbling
It is interesting to see how the creative process was described as not being direct.  It is easy to see how users fall into rabbit holes with MJ, it is less clear to see how these rabbit holes result in productive work outputs.  Joshua
s story gives evidence that some professions are able to take these side paths as being generative.
$C23D95FC-4D73-4B34-99B9-D559DE81330A
Control
Constantly Learning
Joshua presents himself as a problem solver who is constantly seeking out more control over this evolving new technology.  It is interesting  because it implies that control is not something that is fixed, but something that must be practiced.
$FA2A1B60-E6B1-43DF-BFA1-4AF4776400AD
Kludge
The rapidly shifting and evolving system of MJ is interesting to consider from the point of view of users who identify this constraint as an affordance.  Joshua
s ability to understand the algorithms is contrasted with the average users.  It is interesting because his knowledge of the algorithms can come from his research, usage, and the community. 
$792E16E6-C6DE-4E6E-98F8-DF82E5D637A2
Tool belt
Word weight
Understanding that there are many tools in the prompt craft tool belt and that words have different weights that have to be balanced is a clear way of approaching prompt craft.  It is interesting because it shifts focus in how prompts are created.
$EB37325E-866E-4168-BA50-BF06B6EF928D
Acceptance of a lack of control
$D948D4C6-6284-4824-AC59-74C94EE4F820
Confirmation bias
There
s a lot of randomness that goes into what the AI makes and users will naturally look for patterns to fill in and explain the system that can
t be easily or readily understood.
$FEDFEA25-DBDE-4750-B83A-2645B43CB898
Data sets
s interesting to see how Joshua is thinking about how words attach to data sets and what data is included in the sets different words point to or index.  This way of thinking requires a leap of imagining how images are produced, tagged, and shared by communities across the Internet.  
$E30BB26D-2225-45CA-91C6-113C2D7CAF41
Sprinkles on the donut
Some words that are popularly used are believed to have different effects by different users.  It
s interesting to see how these differences in meaning are navigated.
$0248D87B-7AD6-403B-A403-0930D0272386
Different AI Art generators require different vocabulary skills.  What appears as transferrable languages may in fact be distinct dialects.
$8800F478-D6BF-4A11-BE4E-596980AE382C
Conspiracy Theories
It is interesting that Joshua shares conspiracy theories about his experiences with prompt craft with other users.  This is interesting because he understands that this isn
t true, but his belief persists.
$E202C531-C4A8-491C-B5C3-F9A33F10651C
Go superhuman
Hive mind
s interesting to see how Joshua is imagining the utility of the MJ community.  He later presents this scale as also being a threat that has to be moderated through word filters.
$F236B6AF-0AB0-4589-8334-12404EB95B23
Experimentation is the way
Mountain tops
The image that Joshua paints of mountains of data is very compelling.  It is interesting because it necessitates a comfort with the unknown and sense that exploration is valuable in and of itself as a means of exploring uncharted terrain.
$64669B7A-2DC2-466C-9615-9FDD6A2B08AC
~People use the word censorship but Joshua sees it as a means of protecting the community from the scale of use. MJ has seen.  
$74509C27-D93A-4790-A21D-A9523C31DFBE
&Nightmare scenario
Deepfake kidnapping
$6AC26D09-01FC-41C4-9673-643E0949A2E7
Total potential destructive power
It was interesting to see how Joshua was calculating the potential harm of MJ.  This was interesting because it assumed the maximum of production of harmful images.
$C330D844-AE74-4129-97DA-749FED34C450
Bias
Dataset is polluted
It was interesting to see how Joshua was referencing the model as being value neutral and that banned words were just styles that would innocently be rendered as bias.  
$9B81240F-806B-4881-A15F-8BF0A5F44A46
;Different scale necessitates a deeper consideration of harm
$FD25C15F-811D-400C-AF5C-7E792CD9E84B
Copyright issues
s interesting to see how Joshua thinks copyright is growing more diffuse on one side while he also is careful with sharing his own IP in the form of prompts.
$49514C54-5D3B-422F-8976-84E8570B38E2
cHumans benefit when meaningful design artifacts are shared
Ambition will grow as these tools evolve
$05453800-FBF2-4C30-AA40-15CC744886B4
'Marvel as a leader in AI art generation
$78611C2C-5B03-489B-B858-191C3659EB2C
,Society isn
t ready for AI generated media
$D304527D-192B-496E-A82D-BDFFCCC453DB
Secretive prompts
Joshua wants a period of exclusivity with his prompts.  This is interesting because he previously mentioned how some IP could be used to generate 
impressions
$28563342-9AF1-4276-85A1-A79F253A8A16
Norm is to not beg for prompts
It is interesting to see how Joshua explains principles for prompt craft more than actually sharing prompts
$2BC0A2C3-88D1-4A8D-9439-8762673936B1
9Sharing discoveries with community but leaving out prompt
$FDAAB02B-7CB5-4D44-B7F2-1EDF2B4A197D
_@mihr (pink / blue avatar) ***
@Mint the Tech Magus
@ignite
@SparkleToaster
@skies 
@shambibble
$C905DEC7-6FC9-4F84-AB99-7243B7950B10
s interesting to see how Joshua compares the different creative personalities of the high-level regulars.  It
s interesting because the dynamics between these different regulars remains ill-defined.  
$69874D5F-CBCD-47CA-B00A-2A94532BB0C9
Y30 high level users who are active good community citizens
Who have made over 25 k images
$8F682657-A10C-4FE8-BB5F-E806AAC31CC3
&High level users use MJ professionally
		T8
$5538412C-08A0-4DA0-97C0-E6944260A7A7
High level user clubs are a satisfying place to be
s interesting to see how content Joshua is with the MJ community.  There
s an awareness of other tools and happenings, but an interest in the community he has already formed a part of.
$52DCBD75-6E13-4700-A518-44CE3B2C2DC2
Clarinet is different than other super users in his relationship with dev team.  This knowledge is shared through prompt craft channel
$EB485216-973F-40E6-B361-9C518EE0E4D6
KCitizen science
Scientific rigor
Prompt craft as a science more than magic
$C453F2B6-CF0D-479E-867A-E6232C2481BD
@shambizzle
		eq_
en_US
Blank
2022-10-20T03:38:43-0400
