
MJ_Interview 1.wh_Martina
Mon, Oct 10, 2022 11:17PM • 1:21:36
SUMMARY KEYWORDS
prompt, people, journey, ai, guess, super, images, dolly, feel, style, thinking, artists, create, thought, template, art, 3d, community, fine, results
SPEAKERS
Watson Hartsoe, Martina

Watson Hartsoe  00:00
Third, turn on live transcript. Okay, cool. So yeah, the scope of this interview is about the Midjourney AI art community. Thank you again for making time. And I guess like to start out for this paper, how would you prefer that we, you know, cite you or you we want you to use your real name. Do you want us to use a pseudonym?

Martina  00:26
Real name is fine. Yeah.

Watson Hartsoe  00:28
Okay, cool. Um, I guess getting started? Yeah. When did you first start using Midjourney?

Martina  00:36
Um, I wanted, I started using DALLE at the beginning. When I got access. I wasn't we didn't like I didn't like getting access. Part of that, because I thought that this is meant to be something for everyone. And when I realized that my journey was open, and you just got the discord server I just got in. I think that was in I don't know, like four months ago, maybe? I'm not sure. But around that time. 

Watson Hartsoe  01:06
How did you hear about it? 

Martina  01:09
Well, because of that, because I wanted an alternative to DALLE, because I was promoting these AI art to my social media or on my Instagram profile. And people were like, Yeah, sure. DALLE super cool, but I'm not on the waitlist. I mean, I can I don't have access. So I was like, Okay, we need to find something like some alternative. So people can also try it. And I saw that Midjourney was open. Like the beta was open. And this is why Yeah, I don't even know what I found out. Maybe just Googling, like you to like alternatives and stuff. Yeah.

Watson Hartsoe  01:44
Do you remember what your first prompt was in the Midjourney? Um,

Martina  01:50
yes. Well, I mean, it was related to my cat, to Oreo. And I think I believe it was her with a katana. Don't ask me why. But it was that. Yeah. I don't know. 

Watson Hartsoe  02:05
What. Yeah, we go. 

Martina  02:09
Well, my boyfriend kind of wanted this illustration of her. And I was like, Yeah, I'm going to make it you know,  with Midjourney, but the results are very bad.

Watson Hartsoe  02:19
So your first impression was it was not, it was not that good. The output was not that good.

Martina  02:24
Not really, because I wasn't very specific. So it just gave me like multiple styles and something very weird. And I specified that i What kind of like I wanted to be more like, manga. And then I wanted, I specify what kind of cat I have. I have a white black and white cat like a tuxedo cat. And then this way, I also said like, more about the clothing and then I got the proper result. But at the beginning, it was super messy.

Watson Hartsoe  02:53
So like, I do this, would you describe your process of running has been like sort of like trial and error, I guess? How did you learn to to get what you wanted out of Midjourney?

Martina  03:04
Yeah, so I, since I know, like people were making amazing art because the community tab was available at the moment but nownow they kind of limit it a bit.  But in the beginning, like you could see everything that everyone was graded grading, and they were also showing you the prompts. And I was like, okay, my problem, they don't look at all like what these people are doing. So I grabbed notion like this app, and I started creating like a template. So it would help me write the prompts. Like I knew there were like, some websites or people that they were also doing this, but I didn't like the design. And I like notion most. So this is why I did my notion template and in there, I just every time that I was discovering a new way to make a prompt, I would just like adding it to the template. And this way with a lot of trial and error. Yeah, I could improve. And I remember I exhausted like the initial prompts like the free trial, wanted to get like, I don't know, like an hour or something. And I was like, well, I need to subscribe them. Because, yeah, because there's like a lot of learning like the learning curve. And of course, it depends on how much information you have in advance. Like if you already know that it's hard to get to the right image or not. Because for me, I was like yes, this I can do super quickly, but then you realize like

Watson Hartsoe  04:32
how would you describe your usage of Midjourney, like changing over time?

Martina  04:38
Um, the beginning it was very random, like I didn't have a theme and then at some point I just started making Mars Mars stuff like Mars clothing, Mars interior, Mars building, Mar everything. I don't know why. But the beginning was super random. I was just wanted to. I just wanted to get all of the These thoughts that I got, like, I'm not a good writer or painter or anything of that. And I would like okay, anything that I just want to imagine is just going to be drawn by these AI. But as I said, it was super random. And then I just niche down to this topic.

Watson Hartsoe  05:16
Do you know how much Mars? Do you know much of Midjourney you have used to date? 

Martina  05:26
I don't know. 

Watson Hartsoe  05:27
I think /INFO into one of the general channels and it should give you some statistic.

Martina  05:36
Okay, wait, because I don't have it open.

Watson Hartsoe  05:38
Oh, it's fine. You're you are paying for it though.

Martina  05:42
I stopped paying this month because I was gone in September, I took a break of everything. So if you'd like to say info,

Watson Hartsoe  05:50
yes, slash INFO, kind of like slash imagine.

Martina  05:56
Okay, so lifetime usage 446 images.  It's not that much. 

Watson Hartsoe  06:08
446 images, What makes you say that's not that much.

Martina  06:12
I expected more. I mean, of course, I wasn't holidays for three weeks, and I wasn't using it that much. And then I took Okay, well, so this is like two months only? Yeah. Because this month, I haven't used it. Yeah, okay. Well, I don't know. I expected like 1000. I don't know why

Watson Hartsoe  06:28
1000. So you, you used it is used it starting four months ago. So in that time, like four months ago, till now, mid journey has grown a whole lot. I guess like, what was your impression of the Midjourney, like the discord server itself the first time you went there?

06:49
At the beginning, it was super chaotic. Because I mean, I'm a discord user. But I didn't know like, for example, when you get started, you have this newbie channel. And I was in two newbies channels when I was expecting one. But I was in two I don't know why. And when you write the prompt, it was super messy because you were started typing to write it down. And then you see that your prompt is disappearing because many other prompts are being generated. And you don't know where your prompt is. And it's super messy. Of course, like they do this just to show you the possibilities. And then just pay and get your own channel I channel like method three, I don't know how to direct messages. But at the beginning, I just got super overwhelmed. And I was like, Yeah, prefer to DALLE, it's more clean. It's like, easier to use interface. And then this, okay, I understand like they're going here because of the community because it's more for artists and more for all kinds of people than DALLE's more for like, well, it just pre made to just enter in this. So Midjourney overwhelmed me a bit at the beginning, but then I was I kind of prefer it.  I mean, I also find a lot of mistakes in the into DALLE's UI. So

Watson Hartsoe  08:02
interesting. So beyond overwhelming. How else would you describe the mid journey community?

Martina  08:06
Um, I haven't been involved in the community as much as I wanted. I mean, maybe because I didn't even try to search for it. I mean, I did wonder to search. And I was in, in Reddit, seeing what others like what other content creators were doing for the community. And I saw like, there were a lot of possibilities. There's one guy that is called map, I don't remember what else in YouTube. And he actually was making prompts from Reddit, from his community on Reddit for not not from his community from the Reddit, Midjourney channel, whatever it's called. And I saw that it was like a lot of tension there. But I didn't get involved.

Watson Hartsoe  08:56
Can you tell me more about that tension?

Martina  09:00
About what sorry? 

Watson Hartsoe  09:02
The tension you said, what, what was the tension about? 

Martina  09:06
What? 

Watson Hartsoe  09:08
Oh, you said, Map, there was some tension there with like the community of Map are

Martina  09:14
there it was a nice community. I saw potential into doing that, I think in the community and that, you know, because there were a lot of people who didn't have access to DALLE or who wouldn't pay for Midjourney and they were all like requesting prompts and that you know, the beginning it was super popular for content creators with access to get prompts from the community and then they would get like, a lot of videos because what you asked you that you don't have a subscription, you ask it and then a creator makes it in a YouTube video, you know, like it was kind of, like, quite viral, but I think that now it's not needed anymore, because anyone can just do it by themselves, you know? I don't know.

Watson Hartsoe  09:57
Do you think the Midjourney is made for everybody? Or who do you think it's made for?

Martina  10:01
For artists, it is more like conceptual, if you want something more technical, you are definitely not getting it from a Midjourney. It's more like, like video game design and art and sketching your ideas. I started using it too, for that was getting my ideas and they were like, Okay, I'm, I'm always, when I have to start a new project, I have this creative block, when it comes to something that is a bit more subjective. And using the Midjourney, it kind of helped me like visualize this scenario, because while all my projects like personal projects, they have a lot of storytelling. And since I'm not good at drawing, I always kind of panic. And I saw the potential of Midjourney with that, because I would like, Okay, if my project is on Mars here, I can actually imagine the scenario and create it specifically for my project with my idea, my point of view, and I felt that was great. But of course, like, if you want to do something more technical, I don't know, you can do product design, not like UX UI, but more like packaging or whatever, like objects, and definitely the DALLE works better. I did some tests on DALLE  Midjourney with different design disciplines. And yeah, I mean, for example, if you want to get a logo, you know, then DALLE is quite better on that Midjourney can also do logos, but Midjourney is so artistic that  Somehow it doesn't really understand what you're asking. But that was maybe like two months ago. I don't know if they actually refine it to be more technical, or no, did they?

Watson Hartsoe  11:37
I started using mid journey this summer. And when I started I like I did it a little bit. And like it all came out looking really just concept arty. Like and it all had like a similar aesthetic feeling. And I guess then I got access to DALLE. And then I was like, oh man DALLE like, like you said, I was like, Oh, the DALLE interface is so much better. Like I love the way it generates. And it's like the discord server is just so chaotic. But I guess like at some point, I started spending too much money on DALLE. And I was like, wow, this is really like to learn how to use this, you have to do it a lot. And like I will just spend so much money on DALLE. So I should check out Midjourney again.

Martina  12:18
But at least you were able to spend your money on DALLE I tried. But none of my, like, none of my cards were accepted. And I don't know why. Like, I don't know, maybe they have some issue with Spanish cards or whatever. Maybe it's something that I don't know. But I wanted to but creadits and I couldn't. So this is why I was like, okay, then Midjourney is my best friend now. Which I also prefer, because I really like the style of Midjourney. But speaking of the style of Midjourney, I always feel like I always get like very similar results, even my prompts... they're not that related, but it kind of most of the time goes to a very similar style. And I think I get bored of that. I don't know if it's still like that. Because as I told you, I took a break. Like I haven't used it in a month. Maybe because of that. Because I was like it's not that great. You know,

Watson Hartsoe  13:11
I guess talking about like prompt craft. I know that there's people who use chaos, the chaos prompt, as well as like the stylized prompt. I don't know if those were being used, but you can create a lot more variation with those. But I guess I get prompt craft. It sounds like you have like a really developed a prompting guide, a prompting template. What was your thought process in developing that?

Martina  13:41
Well, basically, because I knew I was limited to I don't know how many 100 prompts per month. And that kind of scares me. And I was like, Well, I want to be a bit more structure so I can make sure that I don't spend hours doing this. And I can actually well, you know, because I exhausted my prompts one time. And I was like, this is not happening again. I'm just going to be more methodical. And yeah, like I organize everything on notion like travel, whatever everything is in there, like all my projects, and I was like, Well, I'm also going to get one I think my prompt builder here. Yeah worked fine. Because there can also help...

Watson Hartsoe  14:27
Sorry, oh, no, no. 

Martina  14:30
Having the template can also help you like be more creative because maybe you have this idea but then you see that there's like another perspective or style or whatever. And then you're like okay, maybe this works. Okay, so...

Watson Hartsoe  14:45
have you shared this guide with many people. I know you have YouTube I think I have seen this YouTube video where you walk through this.

Martina  14:51
Yes. And I also share these template on Gumroad and many people download it for free, but some paid, which I was super surprised and grateful to be honest, because I didn't expect that. But yeah, well, people are nice. But I didn't expect anybody with any of that. And um, yeah, they do have that seems I made it. And I've been using it for like, I don't know, I think it was using it for two weeks. And then I was like, Okay, it's validated. It's helpful. I'm just going to put it out there. And yeah, I did a YouTube video explaining how to use it. I mean, it's not like, it's difficult to use it. But a lot of people, like not everyone is familiar with notion. And also like, the way that I constructed it is how I use it. But I don't know, for some people, maybe they have another logic, and I just thought, okay, just make the walkthrough and thats it.

Watson Hartsoe  15:45
So you're sharing this openly? What's your thinking about just like this being this open resource?

Martina  15:51
Because, well, it's like, when Midjourney started, you could just see the prompts from other people. It was like, everything is open source, you know, somehow, like, I just thought like the concept on the whole. I don't know how to say these, but it just makes sense to not keep it for myself and just try to help others, I guess. I think the community is just all about that. And it just didn't make sense to make it private or paid or whatever. You know.

Watson Hartsoe  16:21
I guess like with that, that idea of like, being about openness, how do you feel if somebody uses one of your images as, like a remix? Or like, Have you ever used somebody else's?

Martina  16:34
They have. She mentioned me, in stories. It was fine. But it felt weird. It felt weird. It felt weird, but it was like, Okay, I mean, this is what you'll get, like, when you post something and you share how you do it, then you should expect this. And I actually felt happy that this happened. And then I got comments of people saying that they would also do it. And I was like, okay, then do it. I'm happy. I really wanted to see the results. They never came back at me showing me the results, which made me sad, because at the beginning, I was talking and then I was like, Okay, I want to see, but they never showed I was like, okay, sad. And yeah. But it's shocking, you know, because as an artist, designer, I usually I used to be like, very, you know, like my things and then trying to be open. It was hard. But also like, yeah, now I'm fine.

Watson Hartsoe  17:31
I guess I'm curious how you think about like ownership with respect to Midjourney, because it's like, you're like, This is something you made, but also it's trained on, like, all the images that all these other creators have made. So I guess if if you could just like talk about your thinking on like copyright ownership licensing any of these, like issues that come up with these big AI artr generator tools?

17:56
You never do, you know, like, then I think like, I didn't even make them. You know, I just had the idea. I just imagined how it would be but I don't even imagine it. It's like if I imagine like draw it, but I don't have any kind of thought. But I have like this thought of this, but I don't have like this scenario built on my mind. So I'm like, I don't really think that what I did is mine you know, if I had the thought and had the all the whole scenario drawn in my head, then I would definitely think that I did it that seems like I just put my random thoughts in there. And then these AI draws it for me, then I kind of feel like it's it's property not mine. So how, which is weird. I don't know. Yeah, it's weird. I don't feel like I own it. Because I don't deserve it. I don't know, like the machine did it. You know, I don't know. It's weird.

Watson Hartsoe  18:51
I guess do you feel like you own like your texts? If you're like it, spellcheck corrects it or like, I'm trying to think of other places where an AI might influence some creative output, I guess. Yeah, I'm trying to get a sense of like, what is it about using it that like, on one side, like it feels weird when somebody uses your prompt, because you're like, that's my prompt. But on the other side, it's like none of this is mine. I didn't make the algorithm I didn't train this I didn't this isn't built off of my work. So like, I guess it Do you feel like do you more not own it? Or do you more own it? Or like there's like a small sense of ownership or

Martina  19:28
I think I was fine when others created it  because I never really felt that it was my creation. You know, like, it was shocking for like, I mean, not and then like, I'd find, you know, if it was my creation 100% I would be super upset and like, I don't know, like, trying to claim the copyright or whatever. But, you know, for these things, as we said, it was all about, you know, this openness, I don't really care and because yeah, I don't think I have like this small percentage of me knowing that I own it. Because while you're in the terms, you are the owner of what you create, which is amazing. But I don't know maybe like, I'm like very, like, actually exigente. How they say this in English? 

Watson Hartsoe  20:15
Is that like demanding?

Martina  20:17
Yes. And I was like, Yeah, I don't really? I didn't really do it. But I did. I don't know, it's a weird situation like sensation. I don't know.

Watson Hartsoe  20:26
I guess Yeah, like thinking, thinking about, like, some of these issues around like ownership with like, artists styles being used, for example, like within a prompt, do you think like artists should be given the right to like, opt in or opt out of having their works included in the data sets for these?

Martina  20:43
Definitely, I don't like using artists that like, you know, I never really use the style of other artists in my prompts. I mean, I did it as a test as a test, you know, because I was doing some demos on YouTube, making different prompts. And of course, I actually, I used some, some painters on that. But when it comes to my personal prompts, I don't like using other artists, because I'm like, This is not my style. This is his/her style. And I just feel like it's kind of violating their creative, their creativity, I don't know, I just don't like it. And I would definitely love like, if they actually did this, of course, like many of the artists that we have in the database are dead so it's not like they can agree on anything, I guess, the families and so on. But it still feels weird. I don't really like the idea of drawing whatever in the style of Picasso or whatever. I just, it doesn't feel right. I don't know. But of course, like in real life, many illustrators, and painters kind of took Those are styles as reference for their own paintings. And we're okay with that. Which is fine. But when it comes to literally "in the style of" it just feels like a bad copy. And it's not good.

Watson Hartsoe  22:02
So you've never sold anything you made on  Midjourney?

Martina  22:05
No, no, no, no, no, no, I saw that. You can also like, sell your prompts. And I was like, Okay, this is a bit more original. Because if you're selling the image, then you are actually selling something that the AI did. But if you're selling the prompt, it's something that you did, because you I mean, it's only your text, you are not selling the image, but it just doesn't make sense. Like I saw that there are like a couple of, I don't know more websites that are taking advantage of this, like you as a creator as a AI creator making money off your images or your prompt. And I'm like, this makes no sense. But what people monetize everything, which is fine, I admire them, but I just didn't see the point of that.

Watson Hartsoe  22:47
I guess in thinking about monetizing a prompt, do you think if you include someone's art style inside prompt, they deserve a cut of that monetization?

Martina  22:57
Yes, yes, for sure. That will be interesting. At least these would make sense.

Watson Hartsoe  23:06
Okay, so I think expanding outside of like copyright and ownership issues. Probably are there biases in the algorithm that you've noticed, like certain patterns showing up repeatedly or like to type in a pretty generic word, like one type of person pops up?

Martina  23:26
Well, I guess this is, for example, when we were speaking, when we were saying before that if I don't specify the style, I always get like this dream. Dreamy. I don't know wahts the style name. But yeah, it like always like these. Well, I don't know how to specify, but it's a bit like, video game. Like the first traditional video game, this is all everytime like my default, if I don't specify exactly what I want, I get this kind of style. And this is what I said, that got me bored at the beginning because I like you. I was like, yeah, it's always like this. And I've saw many other artists creations. And they also have the same kind of style. And I'm like, Yes, this is not only my Midjourney, but it like many others. I don't know if like, we all get these as a default or random. I don't know. I mean, if you check the Community tab, and you will see all the different creation like that's like a common theme. I mean, you can get like very different finishes, but in the end it is quite similar.

Watson Hartsoe  24:42
So 

Martina  24:43
it was, it was it was

Watson Hartsoe  24:44
Yeah, I think it's changing all the time. Um, so understanding why things come out of Midjourney, or any of these AI or generators for that matter, can be a challenge. Like, I guess, do you feel like having a better understanding of like the blackbox of these AI Art generators would help you as a creator, or is it just something that's sort of magic and you're like, I don't, I don't really care, as long as it looks good coming out.

Martina  25:12
One of the websites that I saw that was helping you build building prompts was based on on that, like, they were kind of, they had access to whatever, I'm not going to get technical, because I don't remember. But they kind of know about the database, like what it has been fitted. And this way, it was the way that they were actually able to build the prompt builder cover or whatever, you know, because they knew exactly what artists, the AI knew about what style movement, what perspective, different finishings and these kind of stuff, like, so this is what I needed to do, when, like when I saw that I wasn't getting the exact prompts that I wanted. I mean, they were nice, but they weren't as professional as the ones that I was seeing from other people. I would like I really need to know. Like, it's not like I can know everything, but I didn't know what the AI knows. So I can make the most of this. And this is when I started building with template, you know, because I was like, That, like, a lot of stuff. You know, like these AI knows a lot. And I don't know what the limit like I don't know, how much and like how good I can create, you know, so yeah, if they. They do share, either, like, some documentation page where they were sharing some of these I believe. I don't know if it was Midjourney or another AI. Like, I've been testing many others. I don't remember.

Watson Hartsoe  26:51
That sounds right. I think another another question with like, these, these algorithms is like understanding like your limits with like, what content you're able to create with them? What are the banned words? Or what are the types of content that are perceived as being harmful? Have you ever run into a banned word? With a prompt?

Martina  27:11
Yeah, well, not really. Because I well, I remember, I wrote something. And it told me that it was banned. And I'm like, No, it's not, you know, like, I remember, it wasn't something that I thought that it wouldn't be bad, you know. And this also happened, with DALLE, because at the beginning face editing while having your face was okay. But then they kind of took it out for other reasons. And now they bring it back, like I don't know, I think like three weeks ago, but I remember, at some point, I really wanted to edit pictures when I was there, or I don't know, people were there. And it was for me, then it got me super upset. Because I was like, we have so much potential here. You know, like with the background and with our own images that we cannot do, but then luckily, they distributed it like some weeks ago. So it's fine. Yeah, I think DALLE also told me that something was banned. And I was like, it's not, you know, like, but I don't know. I didn't ask for something like, specifically wrong, you know, so yeah. I guess like perspective, like,

Watson Hartsoe  28:22
what do you think of the harms? Or like, what is the content that should be avoided? Or what what types of words do you think are banned or should be banned? Um,

Martina  28:35
yeah. Violence. Sexual. And of course, like, using people like, famous people. I know. Like, I mean, it depends. No, like, they know the combinations of stuff that they shouldn't be doing. But yeah, like, those are the typical ones. I would be happy if they're not in there. Because I remember there was another AI that Well, I don't remember which one it was. And I was on Reddit, and people were just making a bad use. And I was like, Oh, my God, you know, like, this is what we came to? Like, they don't even need to get to other places. They can just build it here. You know, I was like, wow, that's bad. You know. I was like, Okay. I'm happy that  Midjourney was kind of limiting that, just for safety. And also like, from, I don't know, just to have a nice community, you know, not really getting into topics. But, yeah, I'm getting lost in my thoughts. Sorry, no,

Watson Hartsoe  29:34
what would you say is like a appropriate action? If someone begins to make content in this style? Should they be banned automatically? Should they be given notice? What do you think is like the right way of handling? This?

Martina  29:47
Not banned, you know, but I, if you want to monetize it, then, as we've said before, like if the artist can get royalties, then it would make sense, you know, it's not like people are going to be tracking it. And I don't really want to get into NFT's because I'm tired of that. You know, but yeah, like, I don't know how they would be able to control a responsible use of that.

Watson Hartsoe  30:15
Okay, so zooming out of like thinking about the the bad uses of this and like thinking more about yourself as a creator. I'm curious, would you describe yourself as being more of a technical or more of an artistic person?

Martina  30:30
Artistic, I tried to be technical, but it's not my thing. Yeah.

Watson Hartsoe  30:36
Okay, so within your like, artistic practice, would you describe yourself as being somebody who's imaginative?

Martina  30:44
Yeah, This is why I like Midjourney. Because I was like, Okay, I'll think I'm not good with technical or even with like, the building part. I'm more good with the concepts like creating concept and good with storytelling. And with all of that. I was like, Yeah, this is perfect. Like Midjourney just really work with my.. work for me.

Watson Hartsoe  31:08
I guess I'm curious. How would you think like, how do you define imagination or creativity? Or how do you think about those things?

Martina  31:14
I used to think that it was something quite magic. But then I realized that creativity is just information that you have, you know, like you have, we also have this database of everything that we learned in the past, and from people surrounding us what we study and what we see in the internet, and TV, whatever. And then it's just, you know, like this mix of all and then you are creative. But in the end, you created nothing, because it's just a mixture of everything and did what you like, all your learnings, and then to get these a spark of inspiration, and you think that inspiration, but in the end, you're just making a remix of things. And it's okay, you know, like, we've been doing this for 1000s of years as society. But when you stop and think and reflect on these, it just feels like nothing is original. And it makes me sad, but then I'm like, Yeah, but people don't really care. So it's fine.

Watson Hartsoe  32:10
Yeah. What makes what makes you sad about that? What? Oh, what is that? What is sad about that? What makes you sad about that?

Martina  32:20
Nothing can read, you know that when you like, and people don't care? You know, for me, it's always like, I shouldn't be doing something. And then I'm like, Yeah, but it's not original. And then I see another note. And then I see a handful of people doing it anyway. And I'm like, nobody cares. You know, nobody cares that you are not that they are not original. So yeah. And of course with me journey and all of that. It went like this, I actually allowed myself to not be original, because the machine created it. I didn't. So I was more flexible with that, you know, I was like, Yeah, this is not perfect. This is not original, but I didn't do it. It's okay. You know, if I had to draw what I draw my journey, I wouldn't ever publish it. Because I would feel like a fraud somehow, because I did something. I don't know that. That is not my own style. But if you think about all of these artists, nobody really has their own style, like their own style lives. Like there are hundreds of people with the same style, you know. So yeah.

Watson Hartsoe  33:23
Have you ever been topic? Oh, yeah. I mean, I guess like, have you made anything with mindreading? You felt was particularly original, it was like, outside of what you could have imagined by yourself?

Martina  33:34
No, no, no, no. I just, I mean, imagine by myself, like something that I could never imagine myself. Yes, definitely. Because, as I told you in the beginning, like, when I write my prompts, I don't really have anything in mind. And then majority just surprises me. And I'm like, Okay, this makes sense. I like it, you know, but this isn't my problem. Like, I'm very conceptual, but there's nothing there. It's just thoughts. And my journey actually makes the images and it constructs this environment and this whole thing. So yeah, I'm always surprised. But as I said, like, the default style that I was getting, I was actually making me expect the results. You know, at the beginning, I was surprised, but then I already knew more than what was coming, you know?

Watson Hartsoe  34:25
I guess it would you would you describe that, like, knowing what's coming as being like an annoying thing, or do you wish there would be a way in the interface to like, create more variation?

Martina  34:39
Yes, because the four variations Well, I don't know how variation, how many variations, how much variation we had to this moment, but when I was using it a lot, you would get these four variations. And they were so similar, that I was like yeah, I mean, there are some changes for example, like add in one variation and get like a Girl, and then I get the golf ball and then I get only like a landscape. And then then the other one, I get a boy, you know, and I'm like, okay, it's fine. But in terms of the, the representation of that I didn't get like different, something that different, you know, I did get a bit bored of the other, like, you have 1000 billion, whatever input and you're giving me this, you know, but, again, I need to use it again, because I've been quite off for the past month. So I don't want to criticize it, because it might have changed a lot. Because every week they release something new, they change something, and then you just close everyone. And yeah, I'm just picking for a past version of it.

Watson Hartsoe  35:48
So I guess, like at this at this pace of change, where do you where do you see this technology going?

Martina  35:55
Well, methanol, methanol, Google, while meta and Google released the video version of this. And yeah, I kind of expect me to journey and to take a step like soon since the competitors are already doing it. Of course, meta and Google are not open to the public. Well, because they said, because they still have a lot of banned words in there. So they this is why it's only for research purposes at this moment. But I'm really expecting for this open AI to actually make us be makers to videos, you know, but I don't know, I don't know. If that I mean, I kind of feel like that would be surprising for a couple of months. And then I will also get bored of it. You know, because I don't know, I think this thing like like super creative, and you can just build anything you want and just, you know, lead, but then there was not really a use case, I thought about all the different things that I could be doing. I made videos talking about that. And I would like this all makes sense. But then when you come to my context, my real world context like my, you know, it doesn't really make that much sense. So I guess it's still pretty early for these technologies to be that useful. But of course, in other context, like, for example, if you have your news company, and you have you know, like you need something to make your covers your thumbnail, then you do it with this, it's super great. But I don't know, Oh, you are like, whatever. And you need also documentaries, and it makes sense. But in my like daily, whatever, it doesn't really make sense at the moment. That makes sense. That does make sense, since it's part of my disappointment, you know, there we are going super fast with it. But then the wall is kind of behind somehow.

Watson Hartsoe  38:04
What do you think of as being like the main use case for this right now. Maybe you've talked about this already. More like

Martina  38:13
creating whatever you have in your head and just starting using it as a sketch, like, first idea, and then actually build it with whatever material or salt or whatever you need. And if you have a theme, then I don't know, I was thinking, for example, when I was working in a consultancy, and we would do a lot of pitch for clients. And we would meet our architects and interior designers to actually do the renders for that. And with the with me journey, or dolly or whatever, I'm just so easy to kind of pretend like I don't know, like a couple of hours and get the same results, similar results for those pictures, instead of spending the whole weekend, doing extra hours, you know, for that. I don't know, if you like the bigger, like, the biggest use case for me that now is that you could definitely be using it for the for like having these first ideas, different sketches on a couple of hours instead of just spending days. And the result of the other and as I told you, like, in my case, I'm not very technical. I'm not also like very good with illustration on these kind of things. So this would actually allow my concepts to be seen, and to be, you know, like, carved somehow, in another way. Because now I kind of limit myself to that, like, I'm not good at drawing. I'm not good at coding, you know, and these kind of things. And we've been journey I'm like, okay, but this AI can actually throw my ideas. Now I could maybe pitch my concept, you know, so yeah, this makes sense.

Watson Hartsoe  40:00
Hmm. I'm curious how much control you feel like you have over what comes out of the eye? What control? Maybe maybe like on a scale of one to five? Like, one being like the thing that you put in as your prompt like, doesn't it all up here and five being like, it's exactly how you imagined?

Martina  40:25
Well, again, I usually don't imagine it. I'm like I imagined but don't imagine like how I'm super weird. And it depends, like, I would say, like, it's in the middle because something between because sometimes it's quite related to why expect that sometimes I'm just, I just You just get like very disappointing result, like, I was trying to illustrate songs. And I was making a comparison between me Tommy and Dolly and metonymy did way better than Dolly, the overall result of that competition. But sometimes, like, if you weren't that specific, it wouldn't never get to more or less what you were thinking. So if you're specific, and you're right, the proper prom, I would just say that it's quite accurate to what you have in mind. But you have to get specific, this is why I built the template to be more specific, because I would like I need to force myself to write a longer prompt and really tell it what to do. Because it like, for example, when you're working, or you're in uni, and they have this brief on, they're like, you have to build this, you have to work on this and they don't really specify then well, you can be creative because you have output that they wouldn't ever imagined that you would do. But if they need, they can specify more than of course, what you're going to be your result are going to be what they expect. So just the same.

Watson Hartsoe  42:04
I'm really impressed with the prompt guide. And I'm curious, like, what types of literacies make for good prompts are like, like, there's so much knowledge that can go into producing a quality prompt, I guess like for you, if you're thinking about like aI being this new literacy, what do you feel like are specifically for image generation being like the composite literacies that make that up?

Martina  42:29
I'm not following. I don't know.

Watson Hartsoe  42:31
I guess like, I guess like the the prompt, you might, you might need to know art history might need to know lighting might need to know different materials you might need to there's so much knowledge that can go into all these different pieces of the prompt, I guess like, what are those different pieces? I guess I could just look at your your notion board, but maybe just your thinking behind like how you put together those different pieces. I'm curious

Martina  42:55
about that. And we actually check my notes from Oracle's Yeah, because what you said in Davin cloth artistic movement, medium like also like perspective, aesthetics, atmospheres, and all of that. Because I felt that for people that are not artists and or designers, it used to be, it was very difficult for them to do this, you know, like, they they were limited to different art styles like yes, I know about maybe cubism I know maybe about I don't know Bauhaus on this kind of thing, you know, and they're like, Yes, I know that they're different arm movements, and that they but maybe they're limited to 10. And I was like, Yeah, but they're like, a lot of like, hundreds or maybe 1000s of different or movement. And the reason why I did this because myself, I cannot really remember all of them. Cuz maybe now I want to make something that is that I use, but then I, I would completely forget that this is a movement and yeah, and with this guide, I was able to actually choose what I wanted. But speaking of days of the art movements, it's something that I also didn't really didn't want to use because I felt that I was stealing somehow from the movements. And but when I use aesthetics, I don't feel that way. Like if I'm using I don't know, cottage core or whatever core I'm okay with that because they're like, somehow the ownership of the of the aesthetic is okay, like I don't think that it is owned by anyone because it's more like a social thing. But when I go to art movement, I feel that I'm stealing that it's not mine that it is their property of the artist of the movement, because the AI is going to be are not taking paintings and whatever of those artists and then do it in my style. Like do we do that their style for my painting, so I used to against USA aesthetics rather than art movement. It's a weird reflection.

Watson Hartsoe  45:06
No, I think that's a good insight actually. So an aesthetic is more of like a Creative Commons. Whereas like an art style is more property of the artists that that was sort of like the the leader of it.

Martina  45:19
I don't know why because for example, if I do something cyber punk, then I should feel bad that I'm also stealing from that, you know? I don't know why I don't feel that way.

Watson Hartsoe  45:33
I guess like the opposite of stealing is like you're helping to make it or helping to establish it or giving it a sense of, you know, substance.

Martina  45:42
Yes, maybe maybe, because it's more like a social thing. But I'm sure like the artistic movement, we're also that, also that, but maybe I will feel like I'm an artist, so that I should, I don't know, maybe like painters and that they actually don't have this feeling, because they are part of the moment, but since I'm not I feel I don't belong there. It's weird.

Watson Hartsoe  46:10
You don't belong there. I guess thinking about belonging, like, the mid journey community. It's been a it's been a second since you've been there. But have you participated in discussions there? Or like what type of conversations do you feel like happen on the on the majority discord?

Martina  46:26
No, I don't participate. I did read a lot of comments on other creators YouTube channel. But as I told you, I never felt like engaging with that. I don't know why I wasn't too much focused on what I wanted to achieve next. So for example, I was doing me German videos, but they never like, oh, there's also coded by open AI. So I can code without coding. I was always like, going to the next thing. And then in some, in my spare time, maybe like building Mars images with Jeremy, but I was engaging with the community. And I also have my community on Instagram. So I guess that was it. But my community, they weren't really using me journey or valley. for them. It was more like, What is she doing next? Okay, good. You know, and I would like, you know, it's for free. You can try it. But they maybe they really? I don't know, they love seeing it. But they they kind of maybe they feel like it's difficult to use? Or I don't know, like there's like a barrier of entry, but there's not like it's quite simple. Ai kind of feels scary for many people, you know? Not, not this way, because they made super user friendly.

Watson Hartsoe  47:52
I guess. Yeah. Speaking of like user friendliness, is there anything about the majority interface? That's kind of annoying to you? Or do you think it's particularly and user friendly?

Martina  48:02
I mean, it says court. So it depends on how much familiar you are with that. And you do have the parang guide when you add the slash in that. So you do have information like quick access, like no quick suggestions on how it would work good to use. To be honest, I never really used like 90% of the frequently used properties that you have. I was always using imagine and that way. Now I'm like, okay, there are like many things that I could do here. I know, I could do that. But I never really cared. I was like going straight to making my image, which is bad, I guess, because I could definitely have gotten more out of me journey if I did. Like, I dig more into that. But I didn't.

Watson Hartsoe  48:58
I'm also curious, like you, you said like your community is on Instagram. So like, do you picture mid journey like becoming a part of everyday life? A lot of people's everyday life through social media, like they just begin seeing more and more images that are made by these tools. Maybe they never use the images themselves. But I guess like, how do you picture these types of tools, like seeping into other people's awareness? Like maybe where they don't go and test it out themselves?

Martina  49:29
And I don't think I'm following when you rephrase it.

Watson Hartsoe  49:34
Yeah. Do you think that, for example, like other social media platforms, especially as these tools have become more popular, and more accessible, like they were closed and other open? Do you think that a lot of people, maybe like don't even they're not even aware that like something they see on a social media platform is from an AI or tool, or like they do Just like look at, they look at something they're like, Oh, that's pretty, I guess like, how do you picture this becoming a part of other people's, you know, everyday life, even if they're not on Discord and returning?

Martina  50:11
Of course, like, you know what happened with this art auction, an image graded by me journey one, you know, like people, they don't really notice that if it's AI or not because of digital art, and that so I just think like, if this becomes something normal people wouldn't really care. You know, it's just another way to make art. So I think it's just going to be something normal, maybe I don't know, of course, people when you say that it's made by an AI, they're like, oh, revolution, you know, then they start thinking about the whole, you know, like, computers and machines are going to be replacing us, we are not needed anymore, and all these situation, but most of the people might not even get this thought and just scroll, you know, keep scrolling and maybe maybe don't even don't even notice that they don't mind? I don't know. I'm curious to know, to be honest, because I don't know.

Watson Hartsoe  51:11
I mean, I think as it gets better and better, there'll be probably more and more content being made with it, right? Like the it's being shared on other platforms. I guess, thinking about like, you know, what you said the AI taking over or like, you know, replacing us? Do you picture like your relationship with modernity is like, this is like your training your replacement? Or are you working with a collaborator? Or how would you describe your relationship with with it right now?

Martina  51:42
It's a collaborator, because I'm not good at anything that meets your needs. So for me, like for forget, my partner's my best friend, I am just so happy that it exists. Because, yeah, it's not like it's going to be replacing me. Because I actually need it to be able to prove my ideas. So yeah, this is why I, I was so fascinated at the beginning, because I was like, I've just gone, I just can create so many ideas that I had in my mind, but I never really imagined them, I had this idea of it. With this. I can make them visual for others, you know, it's not a competition, isn't it just at all, to have you be more creative, to enhance your creative process to reduce the time and to get results that you might never thought about? Because your contract is limited to your own database. And these AI has, like more way more extensive database. So it's just like, when you are sharing a project with your classmates or friends or whatever. And they, they, they are like, Well, maybe you could have done this the other way. But it's also quite limited, because our knowledge was never going to be as big as these AIs. I don't know. I just think like, it's a good sort of like, same as you're looking for inspiration on Behance dribble on that, then Pinterest them with these, you can also get a lot of inspiration in seconds. So it's good. It's like having a lot of time.

Watson Hartsoe  53:26
So it's like some it's like a fast worker, I guess, like you said, like friend, or like, you know, I don't remember what else you said friends something else. But like, I guess if you had to describe the majority as a person, how would you describe that person?

Martina  53:44
Under pay worker who is? I don't know, like very efficient? I don't know. But yeah, it's not a person who is only an API. It's a subscription that many other people are paying. So if you I don't know where I'm going, but yeah, it's just something coefficient that you need to train to make it better. So you're actually helping it be efficient and more valuable.

Watson Hartsoe  54:14
Have you ever had anything output where you're like, this is this is a human a human made this? Like there's no other way like a human like you were it seemed like uncanny that it was able to make something?

Martina  54:26
No, not really. I guess I was so focused on AI was making it that I never had that. Of course, when I was showing it to family and friends. They didn't believe that it wasn't AI. Yeah, I was doing some testing, you know, like to see what other people would be creating, if I would actually get all the different art styles and what I was getting. And yeah, people were like, yeah, there's no way that this is built by a computer you know, like for them was like super weird, but in my case, I was like I knew about this for months. So it just Yeah, wasn't that surprised?

Watson Hartsoe  55:07
I guess like in thinking about surprises or thinking about AI more, more like as the thing that's being talked about in a lot of different domains of life right now, I guess what would be your most controversial opinion about AI in general, or like aI generated art specifically? Well,

Martina  55:32
I guess it's back to the ownership situation, because I don't feel like I own what I make with this, even though, you know, so I don't know, like, seeing people making money out of this, and me not because I don't feel it's mine. And this would make me feel what this makes? Well, I don't care, to be honest. But if I, maybe at some point, I would, I would be caring because I'm like, there's like this train of people doing this. And I love and I lost it, you know, because this is like, when NF T's and all these things, you know, like, people didn't believe in that. And it was a huge hype, and then you know, now it's gone. You know, and with this, I feel the same, like, maybe there was a time or there is the time now to make money with this. And I'm not doing it because I just don't care about that. You know, I care about testing and experimenting, but not about the money. So maybe if I really thought that what I'm doing is my own maybe I will be making more use of it. I don't know.

Watson Hartsoe  56:37
If you spent if you spent hours making the perfect prompt, trial and error, you know, hundreds of variations, does just spending more time working on something, make it more yours. Does it make you feel like you own it more?

Martina  56:53
Maybe? Or no? I mean, I think the most that I spent trying to make a prom, maybe like an hour and a half. Yeah, that's it. And that was like the Martian fashion spacesuits that I did on Instagram you want to see in the profile, and then someone else actually toward the end. So it was like, Yeah, it's fine. To know. So I was like, yeah, it's not really mine. As I said, it's not really mine. Because I didn't draw it. I didn't really spend, I don't know, a month making the drawing. You know, it does took me an hour how because I was very picky with results. Also, it's just, I kind of feel like it's not me journeys fault is more like my thought of what I'm doing. As I said, like, it makes like a remake of all people doing so this is why it doesn't really feel original. It feels like I did this spacer, but in the end is just probably inspired on other people work, you know. So yeah, I think it's not majority, but I think it's just my way of seeing art in general. I don't know maybe, maybe it's not.

Watson Hartsoe  58:16
So you said for like you're picky. I guess like you've, you've been training your eye or you've been like, your aesthetic sensibilities for a while. So like your pickiness is something that maybe it was just an hour and a half but that's taken, you know, many years to get to the place where you can make that decision. If that person who you know took your image and remixed then you know, they were on the train of like selling AI art. Do you do you ever sense that like that would have been a violation Or? Or? I guess what would you have thought about that?

Martina  58:47
Yes, probably but then I would be like I put it on Instagram the moment I did that I stopped owning the image so it's my mistake I guess that

Watson Hartsoe  59:04
I guess Yeah, I'm like also curious like how you think about imagining with others using this tool like you put something out there other people start read mixing it. Whenever you're on mid journey you see so many other people's images like fly by whenever you're typing in your prompt, I guess like is that a feature you like? Would you prefer to just like be by yourself? Do you think like that social dynamic is an important part of the mid journey experience?

Martina  59:29
I hate it so much the newbies channel that's really why i i paid right away when I started the new wave channel problems like the free prompt. I got into my own chat and I was like, okay, good. I was so stressed with that with within with all we're making. I was like, Okay, I'm not so sure about what I created anymore because I liked it more than I was like, kind of like competing with anonymous people like okay, this is not good. And this is why When I had my own chart, I was more okay with that, because I was just trying to refine things instead of just trying to build something that maybe wasn't my style just because when I saw them creating those things, I was like, Okay, maybe what I had in mind is not good enough. Maybe I'm just going to be doing this because it's it's cooler, but then I felt like it was just stealing from them. So I don't know, it was weird. I didn't like it. But also when you're in your own chart, and you have your nowaday limit, well, a month ago, when I was getting the limited to, I don't know, like three params at the same time, or something like that. And it was actually okay, because of the beginning, I will be no prompt not prompts from, like, I don't know, when you do upscale it or make variations, it was kind of limited to three or four, I don't know how many. And that was a being annoying, because I was like, I just want to make maybe, like 20 variations of the different drums that I have. And I want to scale. I don't know how many others. And of course, like the discord chat was getting super messy. And because it was kind of getting confused, you know, like, I wanted to scale these images and these images like you have, I would just click on the different, you know, like the u one, u two, u three, the different buttons that you have. And it was super messy. So in terms of that, in terms of the UI, work, I mean, they they control the UI, because it's this core part, they actually had something more like Dally, where you have more control of your problems and your results in the process. That would be a nicer experience. Because, you know, you see it loading, you see the progress bar, so you know that it's going to be loading. But if you're like me, and you did click on everything, because you want a lot of variations, and that just gets super confusing, but you know what I'm talking so yeah, I guess I, I also expected for them to, like, move out of the skirt and have their own platform. So I guess they might join at some point. But I don't know.

Watson Hartsoe  1:02:09
How would you? How would you picture that platform? looking or feeling? Or what would it be similar to?

Martina  1:02:21
Well, I guess they will definitely kind of get inspired on Dolly. But with a different approach because it's not the I mean, the personas that are going to be using it journey. Some are the same that dolly but not all like they the target is different. I mean, it's similar, but it's different. You know, I don't know how they will make it I didn't thought about it. But I guess like yeah, I don't know.

Watson Hartsoe  1:02:53
I'm cute. I'm so cute, like the idea of a persona. Like I hadn't really thought about that. Like, do you do you have any rough personas about like a dolly versus mid journey

Martina  1:03:03
are some well what we said before like me journey is more artistic and more like video game and concept and Dolly is more technical and also more realistic. So if you want the stock image, because you're in marketing and you don't have that and you don't want to pay for Shutterstock or whatever it is name, then you go to valley and you'll get your realistic stock image. If you go to Germany definitely not realistic, you're going to be getting an illustration that is going to look super nice, but it's not a struggle. So it depends a lot for me journey I imagine that if you are in marketing and you're using the journey you're going to be getting some some names or covers based on the aesthetic that one but not really stick. And yeah, I don't know. Like for example four would one would be I'm trying to think about different personas now. So for dolly if you want more cops for your designs, you can also do that if I asked me Johnny to make mock ups and it really didn't understand my thing you know we got mock ups you can also download them by them. But I was thinking Can I just make my own mock ups with Dolly and yeah, more or less when Johnny didn't understand the mock up just I remember I was asking also like something Nike inspired and journey to keep in nice direction dolly just didn't understand that so I don't know I just I got lost again this morning.

Watson Hartsoe  1:04:55
No, no, I think that you're I really appreciate you being able to compare these As to platforms, I think that you're you said you're no longer paying for a subscription to the journey or you no longer have access to it or

Martina  1:05:10
No, I stopped like, I yeah, I cancelled my subscription like last week, because I'm not doing things with money because I'm focused on other stuff. You know, I might be again, for sure. Because I, I kind of miss it. But yeah, I'm taking a break on this.

Watson Hartsoe  1:05:29
So you're unable to like, go? Well, I was gonna say you can't like, you can't go and show me like, you can't like make a prompt right now. Right?

Martina  1:05:39
I don't think so. Can I know because description no plan inactive?

Watson Hartsoe  1:05:51
Okay, maybe for another time? I guess are there any? Are there any final thoughts or anything else that you, like, would like to say about AI art in general and modernity specifically?

Martina  1:06:08
I don't know. I think our main topics. Yeah, like for me, like, I really see the potential of Dave's i that I'm not using it is not because it has no potential. It's just like, life happened and stuff. But um, I wish like more people were open to use these tools. I guess this way, also, like these tools would be evolving even more like iterating. Because if people from different backgrounds start using it, then they are going to see other use case and maybe like other solutions that these tools can provide that maybe now it's quite limited to what we designed on RPC. I don't know, like, I know, they do have a lot of personnel. Because when Dallas sends newsletter with updated tab, they're like, we have some writers using our platform. We have teachers using our blood when I'm like, Yeah, you have a lot of people, you know, which is amazing. But I don't know, I'm just seeing like, at some point, they might find some other use cases that we are missing. And I'm actually excited about that, too. And definitely wishing that we journey or Lolly make videos, so so I can get my motivation back somehow.

Watson Hartsoe  1:07:30
Are you motivated at all by 3d? Like the idea of making 3d with these things?

Martina  1:07:35
Yeah, definitely. That would be super cool. Yes, because I was well, that's another thing. I really wanted to follow this tutorial of making something with me journey, although you won't remember. Then it 3d inspired and then taking it to blender somehow, like cleaning, and then make a VR or AR project with that. And that was a very cool idea. But I was lazy. And I never did it. Because of that, because I haven't like, Oh, now I have to go to blender and learn blender to do it. No. But I really wish they had that. Yeah, more than video. To be honest. It's exhilarating exist.

Watson Hartsoe  1:08:20
This is a stop gap. It's quite expensive, you might be able to get a trial of it. This is 2d images to 3d. And I've seen some people using it for workflows between modernity and Dali into 3d models. But

Martina  1:08:33
I didn't have to clean it like that, because I saw this tutorial because it was free. You know, like, that wasn't a tool.

Watson Hartsoe  1:08:42
Let me I'll have to pull up because I was I used to do some research on like 3d And then I just realized maybe it's not quite ripe yet. And I should just focus just on images, because that's what people are spending their time with. But yeah, I think like between, I guess, between video and 3d, which would be more exciting. Which would be more exciting for you. What do you think?

Martina  1:09:03
Um, well, it depends. Because at this moment, maybe video, because of my YouTube channel, there is a bit stack, but you know, I kind of want to get back on that. But when I'm more confident with video on that, I would definitely want to get back at making projects like artistic projects with well AR or VR related stuff. And I stopped doing that because I was mainly using assets created by other people like free assets or I would be buying packs of assets. And if I can make my own assets with AI then I'm back in the game for sure. So that would be super exciting to be honest. Because that because I'm not building many things because I don't know 3d And I have zero interest on learning how to build them with 3d. Same as I have zero interest in knowing how to illustrate and I'm so happy that me Johnny can do that for me. So if I could make 3d with me journey, then yeah, that would be amazing. Now I want to happen. Yeah, Mr.

Watson Hartsoe  1:10:11
I think I think it's on the horizon. I actually, every Wednesday, there's like office hours from a journey. David, David H, the founder, I guess for like four hours just like answers people's questions and talks about, like his philosophy, but I think he was actually originally making the journey for 3d. Like, that was his first idea. And then it's like, oh, it's probably more people just want images. Like, we don't have to make it so complicated. But

Martina  1:10:39
yeah, but everything is going through the now like, also with the graphic design trends, like many 3d logos, and flowing into, like fluid designs and stuff. It's super trendy, and trendy, but in the end is not 3d only to be you know, so that would be that would be amazing. Yeah. Okay, I'm now I really want this to happen. So that would be well, you know, I have a newsletter, where I share about AI in

Watson Hartsoe  1:11:08
rarity. Yeah, I've signed up for it, I peek at it from time to time. I appreciate it. It's inspiring to see your, you know, discipline in like, packaging these trends. I, I think that yeah, I definitely want to get better at sharing research. And like thinking around these emerging topics. Do you have a podcast at all? Or have you ever been on a podcast or thought about a podcast?

Martina  1:11:33
I've been on a podcast, and I do want to start my own podcast. Like I'm thinking about it these days. But I still don't know exactly. I'm doing the thing. This is why I'm a bit, you know, like, not on Instagram anymore. Because I'm trying to think, what comes next, you know? Yeah.

Watson Hartsoe  1:11:54
Well, I appreciate your thoughts on what comes next. And I don't know like is, do you feel like this is like a major trend right now in graphic design? Or do you think it's sort of still like a sub sub trend?

Martina  1:12:08
Stop there. And they like, I've been in Barcelona with my friends and people like, not in the context. And in the moment in Sweden, people they don't know about this. And when you tell them, they're like that. It's cool. Okay, next topic. Like people, they don't really care. I tell my family, they don't really care either. No. So it's a trend for the people that we are in to that, you know, I don't know. And I don't know, like TV that the news? They say something? Yeah, people are like, Oh, that's cool. But again, then they put on our news, and they forget about all of these. Yeah, I think it's still not that big. It would take like, I didn't know,

Watson Hartsoe  1:12:50
it would take maybe what do you think like people seeing it? Like on packaging in the grocery store? People seeing it in advertisements on billboards? People seeing it, like in fashion? Or? I guess, like, at what point would you consider the style of making designs to be to be like, in the mainstream?

Martina  1:13:11
I guess well, yeah. When you're saying definitely same as with nfts. You know, when the nude, we're covering it all the time, then, I guess in that moment, when people realized that that was a thing, but still not. Not everyone cared, you know, so it like people know, like, they truly care about these times. Like, I tried to explain many times to my family, what I do for a living, you know, I'm a designer, and I blame them, and they don't really understand and and I'm telling them, Well, do you see this magazine? Well, I could design it, you know, and they're like, oh, okay, so I don't do magazine, you know, but like for people just really hard for them to understand what we throw. So I think like the general, people, like they don't really, they wouldn't ever really care that an AI did it. But they don't really care that either way, either way, so it's fine. But fine. Yeah.

Watson Hartsoe  1:14:06
Yeah, I guess I'm thinking like other other places where AI exists like, autopilot and airplane, like people. Maybe don't care. But maybe that's a good thing that they don't have to think about. You know, there being some error, like, maybe, oh, yeah, I can't believe I forgot to ask this question. Oh, my gosh, I'm so happy. No, the, the idea of like, do you think that these tools will like replace artists and designers, or do you think it would like grow their ambition?

Martina  1:14:35
No, it just, I mean, it could, that it's, I think it's super difficult to replace creativity. You asked me if I saw some image created by AI that I really thought that it was made by a human that and I'm like, yeah, maybe but in the end like it didn't. I mean, you could definitely happen AI to create random problems to simulate Someone creating the problems. But it's never really going to I mean, at some point it might be getting into that. But now we get back to history when machines were replacing people by doing repetitive tasks and that and then we kind of, were fine with that we develop, like, we develop other jobs, and we are fine. And we will never do the repetitive task anymore. Because we think it's a waste of time. So I kind of feel like at some point, if that happens, it will be okay for us. Because we will be focusing our interest in creativity, another task, maybe I'm okay with machines, replacing these things. To be honest, it's fine. Maybe in 10 years, I start complaining, but now I see it in a more optimistic way. Like, it's okay, you can do this. I will focus on any other. Anything else that I just get in the moment?

Watson Hartsoe  1:15:56
I don't know. All right. Well, speaking of focusing on other tasks, I'm sure you want to go eat lunch. And I will also like, send you some of the new developments with the majority algorithm if you want me to, like, you know, show you like some AP tests with like, the different versions of it. Because I've been doing a lot of those. And yeah, like, I feel like your your guide is something I need to look at, because I've been really spending a lot of time in the prompt craft channel on Discord. And there's so many people who are like, so thoughtful and have spent so much effort and like creating assets to help people. So that's really inspiring me,

Martina  1:16:34
oh, my God, my template, it's super outdated. It's from the beginning is from like, the second week of me using me journey early, you know, now is going to be huge, you know, and maybe different format, that in the moment, it was fine. You know, as I wanted to say that, yes, send me the resources. And also let me know where these goals in terms of the research, because I'm super interested in knowing well, I don't know if like you're writing?

Watson Hartsoe  1:17:07
Yeah, we're writing. We're writing a paper about this. We're interviewing a bunch of different people for this project. What else is there to report about the what you just participated in? I think that like mid journey, we started researching this about a month ago, I think mid journey has almost doubled its user base in a month. So I think it's like about 2 million people now. It's the biggest Discord server by like a factor of like five or like, like four biggest discord servers combined is like still not as big as big as mid journey. But yeah, I think like a lot of our thinking right now just like addressing that, you know, explosion is like scalability, like, you know, the new the newbie channel is even more chaotic than it was before. It's like, it can be very overwhelming for people who go on there just because there's so many more people there. But yeah, just trying to you know, spend as much time on mid journey talk to as many people as possible, but this was my first interview, and I like I'm really appreciative of your time.

Martina  1:18:06
Oh, great. Oh, you're doing great.

Watson Hartsoe  1:18:11
Oh, yeah. Yeah, yeah, I guess like, this is like the new stuff right here. Like, this is the type of stuff you have to tag onto the end of your prompt.

Martina  1:18:20
Okay. Okay, I will save it for when I have when I pay my picture again, which will be soon for sure.

Watson Hartsoe  1:18:28
Yeah. I'll just, I mean, you can look this up chaos is a value from one to 100 stylize value from I think 1250 to 5000. But yeah, you can get it looks nothing like the other stuff. It's like, you can do the same prompt with like different values and it looks like you know, meaning

Martina  1:18:55
in codecs, the one that kept you code that you can actually you have slider no not codecs. No, no, Deputy three you have a slider to to also select the instead of writing kills, you know, like well, I mean, instead of writing the number you have the slider also. So not for girls No, but you can I don't remember the parameters but there's a graphical user interface and you can actually play with that with the length of the text that you had. I've been playing with the PT three a lot to like writing stories and stuff on I was actually i Well, I never really thought about this being applied to art and it makes sense that me journeys doing it because they were already doing it. So I really want to try this. Okay.

Watson Hartsoe  1:19:52
One last thing to like, have you stable diffusion. Are you familiar with the stable diffusion model?

Martina  1:20:00
I've been procrastinating on that.

Watson Hartsoe  1:20:01
Yeah, I mean, I don't mean to pry these resources. But if you're interested, this is dream studio, I think it's the most accessible, stable diffusion model I've met. There's a bunch on GitHub that you can like, download if you have it in one Mac, and run locally on your device for free. But they do require more like setup time. This one is pretty cool. It has like, like you said, like sliders for a lot of these values that you have to type in manually.

Martina  1:20:26
That will be amazing. Thank you. Because I was super well, procrastinating on that. I think I raised it because I remember these ugly logo. I didn't try it. Maybe I need but maybe I was, I don't know if the interface is nice, because I remember I tried one. I didn't like the UI and I was like, I'm not doing this. And no one will let you know.

Watson Hartsoe  1:20:47
Yeah. I mean, I think that like, even just what you've already said about? Yeah,

Martina  1:20:53
did you send me these already?

Watson Hartsoe  1:20:54
I don't know, I think I was really excited about stable diffusion. Just because the way it generates images is a little bit different than how these other ones generate images. So just I think the diffusion model, this is being used inside of Dolly and inside of mid journey. So this is just like a different way of introducing noise into a picture or I don't know, I need to get better at explaining how these are understanding. So I can't explain how these tools work. But I think that yeah, I appreciate your time and have a goodday. 

Martina  1:21:25
OK you too. Thank you. 

Watson Hartsoe  1:21:28
It was a nice talk. 

Martina  1:21:30
Likewise, bye