ZETTEL

ID: FORAGE-DD-006

TITLE: "A nostalgia for the natural sign": platform realism as the afterlife of Krieger's illusion

SOURCE: Dry-Dock/BULKHEAD-05_shield-natural-sign.md; 00_PLIMSOLL-LINE/portugal-draft.md (§ The shield and the natural sign); KEEL BLOCKS/SYNTH-03_politics-of-inhabitation.md (industrialization variant)

PASSAGE: [QUOTE] "As Krieger put it, the verbal description would become a 'natural sign,' as a picture was assumed to be. He added: 'The narrow, literal doctrine of ekphrasis would seem to require this primitive notion of the pictorial as the naively representational.' (Krieger 1992, 12, n12) That is, the image called forth would be in a style of pictorial realism. Krieger may have characterized the view as naive or primitive, but it remains popular. The generative platforms agree." [QUOTE] "The images have a generic or 'average' character (Hintze et al. 2026). They are in a literal sense averages, as they are interpolations from the numerical values assigned to the images on which the model was trained. Steyerl (2023) calls them 'mean' images. Meyer further notes that the images are nostalgic in a postmodern way, expressive not of a longing for the past but for a sense of pastness." [QUOTE] "Generative AI produces images of images, not the natural sign. We could say that what AI shows is a nostalgia for the natural sign." [PARAPHRASE] SYNTH-03 sharpens the same point: "The natural sign has not arrived. It has been industrialized."

RESEARCH OBJECT: A diagnosis of what generative realism IS: not the fulfillment of ekphrastic hope (word become transparent picture) but its simulacrum — a statistically averaged realism whose "mean" character is literal (numerical interpolation) and whose pastness is postmodern style rather than reference. The aphorism "nostalgia for the natural sign" names the aesthetic regime; "industrialized illusion" names its production.

LOCAL MOVE: Test Krieger's supposedly naive doctrine against actual platforms and find the platforms endorse it — the default style of AI imagery is precisely the "naively representational" pictorial realism Krieger dismissed — then flip the valence: the realism achieved is images-of-images, so the doctrine is realized only as nostalgia.

SOURCE TERMS: natural sign, illusion of the natural sign (Krieger 1992); ekphrastic hope (Mitchell); platform realism (Meyer 2025); mean images (Steyerl 2023); generic/average character (Hintze et al. 2026); sense of pastness; images of images.

WHAT BECAME STRANGE: "Mean" becomes a triple pun the drafts exploit half-consciously: statistical average, aesthetic mediocrity, and (in Steyerl's usage) meanness — and the drafts add a fourth register: the mean as the site of nostalgia.

QUESTION: Is platform realism a contingent artifact of current training corpora (scraped Internet is realism-heavy) or a structural attractor of interpolation itself (averages of images trend toward legible realism)?

DEEPER QUESTION: If the natural sign was always an illusion sustained by rhetorical mastery (Krieger), what does it mean that the illusion can now be mass-produced without mastery — does industrializing an illusion kill it, democratize it, or finally reveal that it was infrastructure all along?

MECHANISM: Realism-rich scraped corpora + interpolation in latent space → convergence to a small range of popular styles per subject matter; recursive tightening via what SYNTH-03 (after Meyer) calls the "recursive algorithmization of taste": user-preference predictions optimize future outputs toward the already-plausible; Hintze et al.: autonomous language-image loops "converge to generic visual motifs."

FORMAL SHIFT: From semiotics of the sign (natural vs. arbitrary) to statistics of the corpus (mode-seeking interpolation as the new "nature").

SOURCE FORMALISM: Krieger's natural-sign doctrine; Steyerl's mean image; interpolation over trained weights.

OUR FORMALIZATION: [OUR FORMALIZATION — NOT SOURCE SYNTAX] Let mu(D) be the corpus mean under a style metric. Platform realism: G(p) → neighborhood of mu(D_subject) as prompt specificity → 0. "Nostalgia for the natural sign" = the fixed point where the system's most probable output is a period-style image OF realism rather than an indexical trace: style(G(p)) = realism*, where realism* is realism-as-genre.

TENSION: READING A (BULKHEAD-05/Jay): the finding is aesthetic-historical — platforms default to a postmodern nostalgia; iteration can thicken past it. READING B (SYNTH-03/Watson): the finding is political-structural — the industrialized illusion is a feedback regime ("recursive algorithmization of taste") that narrows the thinkable; no amount of iteration exits it (Bajohr: "no outside-model"). The final draft keeps A verbatim and cuts B.

MISSING: The Figs. 1–5 the argument depends on are referenced but not included in the markdown (STATUS: "images referenced but not included"); no non-Western or non-realist corpus counterexample is tested.

BOUNDARY: Claim scoped to "the principal generative AI systems (e.g. from OpenAI, Gemini, and MidJourney)" prompted with classical subject matter; stylized fine-tunes and LoRA subcultures fall outside the evidence.

CITATION TRAIL: Krieger 1992 (12, n12) → Mitchell 1994 → Meyer 2025 (Transbordeur 9) → Steyerl 2023 (NLR 140/141) → Hintze, Proschinger Åström & Schossau 2026 (Patterns 7.1).

TEST: Prompt the same Homeric passage across platforms and across specificity gradients; quantify style clustering. The claim predicts convergence to a narrow realism band at low specificity and measurable divergence only under thick constraint.

PLATFORM: Gemini 3 Flash Image, ChatGPT Images 2.0, Midjourney (as named in drafts).

LINKS: [[FORAGE-DD-007]] [[FORAGE-DD-001]] [[FORAGE-DD-003]] [[FORAGE-DD-013]]

BIBTEX: @book{krieger1992ekphrasis, author={Krieger, Murray}, title={Ekphrasis: The Illusion of the Natural Sign}, publisher={Johns Hopkins University Press}, year={1992}}
