
MJ_Interview_4.wh.GoldenCross
Sun, Oct 23, 2022 12:39PM - 1:36:00
SUMMARY KEYWORDS
people, prompt, images, journey, muppet, mid, channels, artists, interesting, super, learning, galaxy, words, ai, character, guess, lisa frank, bit, realize, test
SPEAKERS
Watson Hartsoe

Watson Hartsoe  00:00
Thank you. Oh my gosh, yeah, it's so nice to have the auto transcribe. It's just another another place where AI is you know transforming

00:12
very relevant adjacent field, right?

Watson Hartsoe  00:14
Yeah. Well again, I guess to get started again thank you for for agreeing to talk a little bit. Oh my gosh, I have to turn off these

00:25
discord,

Watson Hartsoe  00:27
this discord noise stuff as well. Anyway I'm Sorry to bug you with that I guess to get started how would you prefer us to display your name for this paper real name user ID pseudonym anything

00:39
I don't think I really need to be I guess if I could stay anonymous that's that's fine. So if you just want to make up make up a name or whatever. You don't need to use my my real or my my golden cross hashtag.

Watson Hartsoe  00:56
Okay, cool. I assume Andrew is your real name? And that Yeah,

00:59
yeah, that's that's my real name. Okay, cool.

Watson Hartsoe  01:01
Yeah, I guess to get started, like, what is what's your background in or are? Yeah, yeah, just like, I don't know how much you want to talk about yourself? Just like for a second. But yeah, sort of curious.

01:12
Yeah. I guess without getting into like, super, super specifics. And from a high level, I started out more in kind of the healthcare, tech space, still kind of in that space currently. So different from some of the other folks that I've I've met and become friends with. I know that Josh is much more of like a working you know, game game developer, but also more like a working designer, I would say that I'm more of a little bit more focused on the tech side of things, or on kind of product development, things like that, versus art in my day job, necessarily a lot of design, but more from this sense of kind of product design and development in architecture versus you know, let's say me, me being like a, an artist who you know, can draw something super skilled with with my own hand. So I think for me, that's what made midjourney so interesting, and these other AI programs is because I think specifically, I don't have the same skills that some other actual artists may have to, you know, be able to draw, either with, with, with real physical mediums or with more digital mediums where I, you know, I can I can do some things, but I'm definitely, by no means, you know, like a professional or like a super skilled artists. So the ability to take a tool and use my creativity and imagination, and extend those with those other skills by the AI. That's I think, what was interesting to me.

Watson Hartsoe  02:56
Interesting, when did you when did you get started with the journey?

03:00
Pretty much when it got started. This was back maybe in June. I forget when they first launched earlier this summer.

Watson Hartsoe  03:10
What was your? Alright, I guess? How did you how did you first hear about it?

03:19
You know, that's a great question. I'm trying to think how I heard about it. I think I had heard about DALLE. And I saw that they had promoted dolly too. And some some videos like that on. There's various YouTube channels like Two Minute Papers, which is a pretty popular one, which just goes over and talks about a lot of new developments in AI and other kind of adjacent fields. So I think maybe heard about it from investigating DALLE, because I remember last year, probably almost over a year ago now in DALLE one came out. And it was okay. But it wasn't really anything to write home about. It was a good precursor of what was to come. And then when DALLE two came out, I think I remember seeing that but I was on the waitlist and I thought I didn't want to wait what other options are there in disco diffusion was fine, but it was kind of a it was a lot of a lot to set up and kind of a lot of manual stuff that wasn't quite as nice of a user experience to get into that sort of flow state, which Midjourney allows. So I think I found mid journey after being frustrated by the other more organic solutions going to open source solutions hadn't been developed enough to really be usable from unless you really want it to invest the time and kind of be a pain about it. But for the average Joe and I definitely have more technical ability than the average Joe but even for me, I wasn't ready to invest that level of time into it. I think midjourney through the discord bot interface, which I was already super familiar with discord allowed it to be just a no brainer where there's not a whole new you don't have to get a Google Colab. I have running and download all these things and wait, you know, 30 minutes for an image. It was really fast. So I think that was what draw me initially to my journey because it was available before something like DALLE. And then when I actually got to DALLE to I was kind of under underwhelmed because I had been playing with Midjourney and thought, Okay, this is interesting, but you know, not as interesting anymore.

Watson Hartsoe  05:24
What was your first prompt in mid June? Remember, yeah, I'd

05:32
have to look back. I don't I don't remember off the top of my head, honestly, probably something just to test out, you know, some basic phrase about what it could do nothing. Nothing complicated, I'm sure.

Watson Hartsoe  05:44
What was what was your I mean, it sounds like you've already been on Discord. What was your What was your impression of the mid journey server when you landed in it?

05:55
Let me think it was it was pretty wild, actually, in the beginning, because it was all. So all image generation was happening in the channels. So you can imagine when there's five people in there, it's not too bad.

06:10
But the this was in the beginning of June, let me see Hold on.

06:20
Yeah, I think it was probably, they switched to allowing you to DM the bot at some point. But in the beginning, it was all in the channels. So I wasn't really participating in like much discussion. Or like other channels besides just image generation initially, right. And that was something where everyone was doing it in the same channel. So what was fun in the beginning, right, is that you can see what other people are actually doing. And that's where it was. brilliant move by using discord initially as the platform, I guess. Because it instantly enabled that sort of collaboration. And the ability to bounce people's ideas, and then take them and remix them, even before remix became a thing, right? It allowed us to do that in a way that encourage that sort of just back and forth kind of flow state where someone says I'm gonna draw, you know, one of the things that I like to mess around with is just like Muppets are that that type of a character, just because they're especially hilarious looking in very, like realistic and serious situations, like, you know, getting charged for tax evasion or robbing a bank. You know, there's, there's lots of great situations that you can do things that you can't necessarily, you know, it takes me months and years before I could learn how to use Photoshop and digital art enough to do all that myself. So the ability to say, you know, I'm going to prompt for something very specific. And just see, you know, what it looks like, where does it where does the latent space in the mind that mid journey kind of take it, there's a lot of interesting exploration things there. But in the beginning, it was interesting, because everyone was in the same channel. So someone would prompt for, let's say, I don't know, a muppet. And then someone else would be like, well, a muppet that's in space. And then someone would see that and think it would be funny and say, Well, maybe let's have it as a muppet space pirate. And he would kind of allow to riff off each other. And in my mind, it was very similar to more of a musical experience. Because in few spaces, can you really collaborate in real time in a way that doesn't get in each other's way. If you imagine everyone, like 30 people working on the same painting, it would be pretty chaotic, without really coordinating before and be like, Alright, we're gonna make a dragon on the left side, and we're gonna make a night on the right side, and like, I'm going to take this top left, and it would be a nightmare to try to coordinate all that. But in something like jazz, you can bring four people together, that have never played, we've never worked together before. But you give them the same general rules and say, right, we're playing these chords. And they can riff on each other and someone, you know, play something and a fun little lick. And someone hears that and says, we were like that, I'm going to kind of take that and play it back and change it a bit. And someone, you know, hears that and says, Ooh, I like that. I'm going to change that even more. And let's try this. And it allows that really interesting, rapid collaboration, in the sort of quick feedback loops. In in mid journey, if you're doing it in a group setting. That's I think what really compelled me is seeing what other people were making and being inspired by that and then kind of re mixing it or taking pieces of it. And maybe someone had this really elaborate ornate, you know, Regal looking King character. And I thought, Okay, what if I take that and I just insert the word muppet. It's like this really elaborate ornate, you know, Regal looking Muppet king. And just what is it? What does that look like? So there's a lot of those things for you just start asking this question. I wonder if they So I wonder if that. And I think it becomes kind of an exploration in the beginning. And that's I think what really hooked me in is seeing and making friends with some other people that were making, you know, some random or wild looking stuff. And you just get to talking with them and build friendships just by seeing what they're what they're creating, and then riffing on it and having some side chat. And then at some point, they allowed you to take the bot into a DM mode. And you, you know, go in private. And I think that was needed, because when there were so many people in the stream, it was just chaos, you couldn't even find your own images, to be able to DM the bot or then bring the bot into your own private server, which I've done, where I can just catalog and try to organize images by by channels in, in my own little private Discord server, it allows you to have much more control over that organization. But you also lose out on some of that sort of, you know, random serendipitous collisions, of just running into other people's stuff.

Watson Hartsoe  11:05
I yeah, I mean, the the joy of just watching somebody make something in one of those channels, like just seeing how their prompt evolves, and seeing how maybe, like, the AI spits back something, and it changes their thinking. I mean, that's almost as entertaining as doing it. Like myself sometimes. So I totally see the value of that. Yeah, like the serendipitous collision, but also just like the, like learning from the learning perspective, I guess I'm curious, like, beyond just seeing people in channels, how, how would you describe like your evolution as a, I don't know, prompt crafts person user? I don't know how you think of yourself or just like, Yeah, your your abilities with Midjourney? How would you describe that? That path of progress?

11:49
Um, that's a good question. I think kind of in the beginning, everyone, maybe goes through some some phases, I don't know if I've thought about it enough to like, articulate clearly what those phases would be named. But in general, I think when you first get started, you're just Alright, what's like something random, let's let's do something random. And it's usually something either, you're trying to be kind of beautiful and poetic, or you're trying to just be goofy. And I think most people fall into the goofy realm. Some people might see something like, you know, beautiful town on a on a lake. Like, that's a great prop to do. And it's interesting. And it's beautiful, but it's not. Once you learn more about what my my journey is, and what it can do you realize that those are actually kind of some of the most boring prompts. And I think what's fun is a lot of people actually start with something more goofy. And they say, like, I don't know. Whatever, you know, Joe Biden versus King Kong or something, write some random thing. And just see what majority does in those situations. And to see either it takes it in like a very literal way, sometimes if you write a decent prompt, and you might be surprised by Wow, that's, that's accurate, that looks that looks good. Or sometimes it takes it in like a really weird way that that you intend, especially with with v3, which wasn't as realistic. And I think that shows you also kind of the creativity of of something like mid journey, in that it kind of lures you in by saying, Oh, wow, that's not what I asked for at all. But like, it looks pretty weird. Let's Let's investigate that more. And I think a lot of people just start out investigating what all it can do, like what are the boundaries of if you're going to do a city? Do a person, can I do a dog? Can I do this. And then I think they start to explore more. And as you see how other people write, you know, the best way to learn is by looking at how other people's prompts look. And then what they turn out to be. If you see an amazing image. It's kind of become a cliche now, but like someone posts a great image and you ask prompt question mark. And then there's a weird, like ownership where the person is either like, oh, sure, here's my prompt, or there may be a little cagey about it. And they don't want to share the prompt, because they've worked on it for six hours. And they finally got it perfect. So different people have different perspectives. But if someone is willing to share what they did, that's really the best way to learn. So I think a lot of people start out by just going off on their own, just making weird stuff, they probably hit some sort of a wall. They see other people stuff that's much better than anything they can do. And they think, Oh, wow, there's a lot more to this than I realized. And then they probably start researching and looking at other people's prompts and exploring, but you really have to experiment in mid journey has has changed like three or four times five times probably since just June. So it's there's a lot of new learning that's, that's kind of constantly required. So I think for people coming in, you just have to expect that rapid pace of change. It's going to be a totally different experience a year from now than what it was, you know, a year before us.

Watson Hartsoe  14:59
I guess this is A few things there that I'm kind of interested in hearing you talk about more. One is like the idea of ownership of prompts versus, like the idea of ownership of the data set versus like the outputs, like, there's so many layers to ownership that I think are really interesting to see how people navigate them or think about them. Yeah, I think that. Yeah, I don't know what how you approached, like, sharing prompts, or if sometimes you share?

15:26
Yeah, it's an interesting question. Because whenever you get an output image, and there's like a very clear, Shutterstock watermark. That's like, embedded like kind of distorted in the in the image. Which is funny, which, which means the only reason that's there right is because it, it has been clearly trained on not one, but like a lot of images that have watermarks, which means it probably shouldn't have been trained on this. But that's like an interesting question of just who actually owns the data, if an artist you know, their data is in the machine. Did they have any ownership? It seems like maybe not. So if we assume that that like all of the training data, even if it was on copyrighted materials, who didn't give their permission, like if that's still kosher, if the legal the legalese in the the lawyer settle that, then I think it's who owns the work in mid journey, I think, in their terms of service have said that, that we own it, but like, also, they own it. So it's kind of a, we both own it 100%. And that's where it's I think, by default, right? David's vision, in the vision of the journey is to keep everything kind of public. And I think that works in some cases, but if you're making a ton, a ton of stuff, having everything public, to me makes it more of a of a game, unless of a tool. And I think that's kind of a distinction that, that David and the team is gonna have to continue to face and grapple with, how to make it more of a tool and less of a game. Even if making it more of a game is, is better for user engagement and driving up metrics and getting more users and making it addicting. And I think in the ownership question, if you're in private mode, which I am, just by default, the public mode is is imagine if you're working in working in Photoshop, let's say. And if you had a setting where it would automatically publish every time you hit save, two, or just every autosave, every two minutes, auto save to your personal website. And it would also just like blast out to all your social media, every time you hit save on every project you're working on. That would be an insane feature that no one would ever use. But it's the default from Midjourney. And I get the division because it's not exactly the same. So it's a bit of an unfair comparison. But I use that as hyperbole just to show of like, for every other walk of life, when you're doing creative project, the default is not to have every single draft and every single idea, just be public by default. And I think in my mind, there's a lot of stuff that maybe I want to come back to I want to work on later, or it's a mid, you know, a project, it's in the middle of being finished. And I don't want to necessary just publish that to everyone. So there's there's some level of, in my opinion, I appreciate the ability to have privacy of saying, Okay, it's private by default. And then I can choose what I want to make public. So I really appreciate that feature. But I know that you have to pay extra for that, which, you know, $20 a month is nothing for me, but for some people could could be a big deal or they might not be able to afford that. So that's something I think it's it's an interesting case, for the ownership question. I think it's do you own the image? Or do you own the prompt? I think we don't own the prompts. We really just own the output image. But if you don't share the prompt, right, then no one no one has it. And people can kind of reverse engineer them. You know, if you're good at midterm that you can, you can pretty much reverse engineer most most prompts to a pretty, pretty close degree, I would say. It's not going to maybe be exactly but it's going to be similar. But some people you know, are cagey about sharing the prompts themselves. And it's a weird thing, because I think as humans, if you've worked on something a long time, you kind of feel like hey, this is mine. I own it. I've worked on this, but then you look at it, you're like, Wow, this is only you know, 16 words in a row with a few comments. So it's a weird, it's a weird thing. And I think people feel very differently about it. But in general, I feel like it's nice to be able to share those. You know, if someone asks, again, I'm not publishing everything by default. But, you know, if someone asked, Hey, what was that prompt? I don't know. I guess I haven't found a reason where I'm like, unwilling to share that something was like so secret or so specific. That I was unwilling to share but at least with like, you know, someone who is legitimately interested, I'm not necessarily going to publish, you know, every one of my prompts on a Twitter page and just give them out to everyone. Because some of them are kind of interesting and unique.

20:13
So I think it's in that way, it's kind of asking the question of like, do artists describe in detail how they make all of their works every time? Probably not. But in some cases, it can be it can be helpful. So I think the ownership is, is more based around the images in the terms of service, but how people feel about the prompts is definitely an interesting debate or discussion, I guess.

Watson Hartsoe  20:39
Yeah. I mean, I think we could talk a lot about prompts because I'm so curious, like how people have these like magical associations with prompts or like how there's almost like superstition that goes into. Or,

20:53
there's so much pseudoscience and superstition, it's hilarious, especially as someone with with a bit of a technical background, I guess, where my background isn't in, isn't in AI, but I know enough about vectors and tensors and machine learning and the basics of how that works, and how they've built, at least how the devs have explained how they built I don't know how they build MJ but the devs have talked a lot about how they have in some of the things that people come up with about you know, these ideas of someone's prompts being able to like influence someone else's prompts. Like if I prompt for a lot of pizza, then like someone else who's making bagels, like their bagels might start turning into pizza, some weird, seamless and weird stuff about somehow prompts bleeding over into other prompts. And they'll use you know, they've created a whole channel and it's become almost like a little a cult or a religion around people who are using this sort of confirmation bias to try to prove out these things and say look, here's a ghost in the machine. And I think just because it's a big chain, alright,

Watson Hartsoe  22:04
sorry, what's that channel? I didn't know this existed?

22:06
Let me find it. It's it's a sub channel of the prompt. Prompt craft it's disappeared because no one has talked when we find it. Prompt craft if you search the word bleed, it'll probably show up. Okay. In color blue colorblind,

22:26
maybe leak leak. Sorry, that leak and I believe leaks. Prompt leaks. Thank you. I am definitely a long it's a long thread. And definitely there's one guy shark who I think is has very good intentions but is very very biased by cognitive bias of seeing something and then thinking that it's a pattern. So there's a lot of and he's like really investigated seeds in it's like, there's certain seeds that that work in certain ways. And I think that's the whole magic seeds and things like that. It's a whole nother adjacent religion.

Watson Hartsoe  23:11
This is great. I've

23:12
already been thinking about that, but I've been talking with Shark I've been talking with Shark you have Okay, okay. Yeah, I

Watson Hartsoe  23:18
was hoping to interview them I didn't realize this is so helpful though. I'm gonna definitely ask about

23:24
Yeah, they've they've definitely done a ton of research and he's developed or they've developed like using like 2d Stripes is a it's like almost like a benchmark to see like what's going on with the seed in the way the seed works right it's it's some just kind of random pixel color noise field that might be based on like actual real images that have been blurred out is my is my theory based on what I've looked at but it starts with that sort of noise field and then it kind of overlays your prompt right and all the things with that kind of blends those two things together so that's why if you if you have the same seed with a prompt you're gonna get generally the same looking thing so he's I think looked at to the stripes is a prompt to investigate like, what's going on with this? See there's there's something weird going on. But yeah, there's definitely a lot of someone will like post an anecdote and like look, I was prompting for fireflies and then like, this next prompt that I had, which didn't have the word fireflies, but also had the words like Forest scene night like fairies, like also had fireflies it's like well, like, those are all things that are probably going to be similar. So I think this is a lot of people kind of don't know what they're talking about pretending like they do. And I tried to go in there and explain like scientific method and type one errors versus type two errors and like, how no one has actually proved anything. And here's some like good exit experiments you should run But no one is really run those to prove it. So I still think it's a bunch of it's a bunch of suicides in terms of this thread just because the devs have clearly said that majority doesn't have memory, in terms of like, what I prompt can't influence what you've prompted, because they only update the model every so often. It's not like it's ongoing, updated. But this entire thread, all these people are trying to say, like, look, here's proof that like, you know, something is happening. And it's interesting, because maybe there is something happening. We don't we don't technically know for sure, but like, we're pretty sure it's not. So it's it's a great little microcosm. Of that. So I don't really use those channels. But that one was someone tagged me and it was interesting to look at.

Watson Hartsoe  25:51
No, I appreciate you pointing this out. I think you bring up an interesting point of like, the inability to really, truly audit or understand or explain how these systems are working, and how in that uncertainty, some people will, you know, seek rigor and seek, you know, to figure out empirically what can be known where others will, you know, develop conspiracies or superstitions

26:18
trending on art station has seemed like its work before then maybe keep putting it in. You know, there's there's a little phrases like that octane render, which like people will still put in, in use test P, when test P is actually already photorealistic. So putting like Octane render in a photorealistic thing, almost can make it like less photorealistic. So there's, there's things like that, where the superstitions may actually be hurting. But there's probably a lot of stuff that I include, which isn't actually doing anything. And I think that's part of when you have such a big system and so many variables, it's really hard to isolate them and say, Okay, if I add, you know, the word unreal, render versus octane, Render, you know, how, how do those impacts things, it's hard to tell a difference. But if I add the word, Lisa Frank, you know, there's a very clear difference and how that's gonna affect things with the color. So it's hard to be super empirical with such small sample sizes. But you can do a good enough approximation, in some cases, depending on you know, what, what experiment you're trying to test, I think for most people, like running, scientifically, sound experiments is not easy, or something that anyone really is interested in. In doing. So. If it works, keep using it, I think is a lot of people strategy.

Watson Hartsoe  27:44
I mean, you had mentioned something previously that they find, you know, both exhilarating, and also kind of, you know, a sense of doom about, which is like, the things that I'm learning the skills, I'm picking up maybe irrelevant with the next release, or this idea that like, you kind of have to be on your toes to use mid journey. I can, you can, you know, depend too much on what worked yesterday to work again, tomorrow. Is

28:07
that something that we've learned? I don't know, I don't know how old you are. But I'm in the millennial bucket. And I think that's something that we learned the hard way. Is everything changes, just in all facts of life, in that it wasn't the case for the Boomers and Gen X before us. I think that partially is due to the internet, which allows this sort of exponential change. But if you look at all these things that we took for granted, right, like education, education is kind of, always in in beta. It's a phrase that my brother use, but the ability that you always have to be learning new things, and I think we see it in kind of all walks of life, and especially with something as rapid as AI. But even just the economy, right? It's like, Alright, let's go out and get jobs. Oh, sorry, like 2008 happened like you're screwed. Recession. Try again. All right, things are different now. All right. Now, let's try Oh, now COVID happens. And now we're entering into kind of another recession. And you know, stocks are down the economy is down the drain. So there's these things which before were true, and now we're realizing, oh, we can't take that for granted. We have to be adapting, right. So in the economy, I'll just use it as one last example, the idea of oh, just buy and hold like 60% stocks and 40% bonds forever. And like, that's the safe strategy that will always work. It always has worked before, let's keep doing it. That did work. But if you kept doing that this year, you'd be down like 30%, which is insane. So these tried and true strategies, you realize you have to be adaptable. In that case, in AI, it's it's even faster, because things are moving so much, much more quickly. So I think in the beginning of when we started with mid journey, it had a really hard time doing just like faces, and then it got so much better and better and better and it's continuing and now we take it for granted that it can do a pretty good face, it still has trouble with hands. But if you look at, you know, a year from now, I think we have to just accept Yeah, that it's a bit depressing in some way to know that everything you've learned is gonna be, you know, outdated, so quickly. But it's kind of how it's always been, it's just that that pace is accelerating and accelerating. And I think it really encourages the fact that it's important to know how to learn. And that's not easy for a lot of folks, because school is not necessarily designed to, like, teach you how to learn, it's designed to teach you how to like function in kind of like an industrialized, you know, nation. And like in the workforce, it's not really supposed to be just about learning. But if you can't learn and teach yourself and learn new skills, it's going to be really hard to keep up for now, you know, if you haven't kept up in the last month, there's totally new things that you can do with remix, for example, and mid journey that have unlocked totally different doors, where if you don't know how that works, you're at a huge disadvantage. So I think there's always going to be those people that are on, you know, the bleeding edge, and, you know, using every of the latest feature, and there's going to be that sort of adoption curve afterwards. But the pace of change will just continue to get faster and faster. As the tools that are being built, are able to directly enable the next set of tools that are that are able to be built, I think,

Watson Hartsoe  31:28
hmm, yeah, I yeah, there's so many questions about learning in school and education. I think that AI really highlights in a way that you did a good job describing. If you were to describe my journey as a school or my journey as a teacher. I mean, I think you've talked a little bit about how that learning happens. But I guess I'm curious, like, do you think they're structured to support this type of like, constant learning? Or do you think that this is something that will, you know, as as it grows, become more of an issue, or like, the people who are on the bleeding edge will get even, like, I like just even discovering these super user clubs for me, like I'm in the 5000 Club. I was just like, the first when it popped up. I was like, What is this? Like? I wasn't

32:16
in the zone. Interesting little microcosm. Yeah. however many there are five of them now, I

Watson Hartsoe  32:23
guess. Yeah. I mean, I don't I don't know other than to say like, it seems like one of those things where it's like, I didn't realize they were grades. And now they're going from preschool to school.

32:34
Oh, yeah. It's hilarious because it's, as people rose up, right. So I remember when you have to do info in the mid journey. And then it like registers, what club you should be in. So if you really should be in 10,000, and you haven't done info in a while, in mid journey, you're still going to be in the 5000. So a lot of people might not be in the right club, because they haven't done that. But for the people that are both interested enough in my journey to use it a lot, and also interested enough in learning. And I think that's what's learning or sharing. And I was sharing random images of funny stuff in the show Intel channel for a while. And that's how I met some of my first I guess, friends mid journey friends, initially, just like seeing, collaborating on random silly stuff and show and tell, right, like I would post muppets and then someone would post like, you know, Muppets on D Day, and then you would just kind of do random weird stuff and, and kick off a friendship. And I think that was interesting because of that collaboration. But I didn't really use that one anymore. Because it's so busy. Now there's what 3 million people here, which is wild. In the beginning, there's like 30,000, so it's a lot, it was a lot smaller. But with the clubs, it allows a smaller space for people that are actually interested in either sharing what they're working on, either they think it's, it's really cool looking, or they think it's funny, but also share what they're learning. And I think that's what's interesting, because there's a lot of discussion, not in the lower channels anymore, but in the higher channels, about certain tools or using other adjacent tools or how to get a certain effect or things that they've learned. Some people have been talking about seeds and stuff. So there's a lot of that like, Arcane knowledge that's shared between the super users in those clubs, which is kind of cool. Because it provides a small space to actually have a conversation. And there's this interesting process I've noticed as the clubs have been created, and as people kind of level up, we're in the beginning 1000 Club was like or 5000 Club, whatever it was, was like popular and it was kind of there's a lot of conversation, and then all sorts of image posting. And then eventually as more and more people join it just be the conversation disappears. And that becomes mostly just image sharing and just people sharing like have walls of images, and a kind of, it's almost like a gentrification process, where it goes through this cycle of like good discussion, interesting kind of artsy folk. And then it like becomes just kind of basic and boring and people posting the same, you know, just kind of basic images you see on the front page every day. And it's just this kind of factor as is a group size goes from, you know, 10 people to 100 people to 1000 people, you can't have 1000 people in a group, it feels like a small, you know, small group discussion, it's just too big, too many people talking. If someone posts something, eventually, someone's gonna get mad and like, start an argument. And that just makes everyone you know, tune out and not be interested in participating. So it's this interesting process that I've seen, where if you look at the early clubs, almost no one uses them now. Because most of the super users, the people that are serious enough have now graduated to the upper clubs. And now 10,000 Club is going through this gentrification process, where it's, it's getting super chaotic and super busy, where it's now impossible for for people to really keep up with, in like, read every message in there, where the 25,000 Club is now the new like, cool spot, because that's the highest one. So that one is a little bit slower moving a little better discussion, more serious folks, and less noise. But eventually, that one will get too big, right, and they'll maybe have to make a 50,000 club. So I'm not sure exactly what they're going to do. But at least for now, it seems like whatever the highest club is, has kind of the best, most interesting conversation, just because of the fact that it's kind of where all the super users are, and less interested in just posting like, boring stuff that everyone has seen. Because if you've made 25,000 images, you've seen a lot of stuff. So you really don't need to see things that you've you know, everyone else is like seeing like, unless it's really interesting, or, you know, really funny or something. It's not really needed. So that's where I think it's interesting to see that distinction of how different people use it. And what specifically do those kinds of super users do?

Watson Hartsoe  37:14
So yeah, I mean, I love that metaphor of gentrification. I think that that's, that's really interesting to imagine, just like its keeps rolling into these, you know,

37:25
greater, greater continual wave as the, as the sort of adoption curve comes in and the masses join, right.

Watson Hartsoe  37:34
So I mean, do you think that like, the the people who are the highest users, I don't know, are there, I assume that there must be people who made over 25, who have made like, you know, 50,000 or 100,000 images?

37:46
Yeah, there was, I ran the stats on it. Or somebody one of the devs posted, we find it posted the stats. Shoot, wherever that be. It it was a perfect, I predicted it was going to be a power law. And it was hilarious, because it was it was a beautiful power law of like the distribution of how many people were in 25k Club versus 10k versus 5k. Which makes sense, because that's how like humans work in the situations where you have a very small number of people producing a ton of images. And I think there was like one or two guys who had done like over 100,000 But I think they might have been doing it as part of like something for work, where they were just cranking through, you know, just like almost constantly we're just every, every day just image after image after image non stop. So there's definitely some people like 50 or 100,000 Plus but I think in the 2500 or 25,000 Club, there's still under 100 people that are at least in the channel, there could be more than just haven't, you know, done the info command. So maybe there's 200 but probably probably around 100 to 200 and then there's 10,000 there's about 1000 in that one trying to find this

Watson Hartsoe  39:13
oh yeah, I would love I would love to see graphic this graph.

39:17
It was great just because it was such with numbers this big right it's usually hard to do unless you have really big sample size but 3 million people that's that's plenty. Let's see if I can find it yeah, there it is. Perfect. I'll post it in the discord.

Watson Hartsoe  39:47
Oh, okay. Okay. Do you know when this was

39:53
Yeah, so everything is probably risen up a bit and especially people from 10k have probably more have joined 25k specifically because they've told them that it exists in 10k used to be like the boss level and that 25k is the boss level. So people are specifically just churning through images to reach that club, because they know that some of their friends are in there and they don't want to be left out. So that's where it's it's definitely part of like the game. You no leveling up in the game. That's the only way to do it. Really? Let me see when this was posted. Yes, was on October 5, October 1, I would say the numbers definitely for like the. For the lower levels, it's probably doubled. But it was about let me find this as I put some numbers to it. This was just like an estimate. Not the exact numbers, but just basically so in this, at this point, there's only 50 People only 50 bucks in the 25k Club. Now there's probably 100 Maybe more.

41:03
In the 10,000 was actually more than this. So this was 1000. Let me get the real numbers because I had the real numbers.

41:12
Just need to find it one second. Here it is perfect. So this is a screenshot from seven. Sorry, this is the wrong one. There it is.

Watson Hartsoe  41:30
Nice.

41:34
Yeah. So this was this was on October 5. Thank you. This was super interesting to me, just because it was exactly it was what I expected. And then to see it perfectly beautiful power law was a great just like confirmation of math. But yeah, you can see how there's 10,000 People who have made 1000. But only, you know, 33 who have made 25,000. And here's his his screenshot at that point in time.

Watson Hartsoe  42:04
Yeah, I was trying to figure out how to do this. And I guess you have to be a dev to get these numbers. Yeah,

42:09
you have to be one of the mods to see you in the role, but again, this is an underestimate, because it's only people who've done infill in the 24, if you've made 25,000, and you haven't known about the 25k club, or any of the other clubs, probably unlikely, but in the 1000 Club, that can easily be like, you know, twice as many. Because a lot of people probably haven't thought to do that info command.

Watson Hartsoe  42:37
That's interesting. I mean, yeah, like, I think you've, you've mentioned a few times, like the idea of modernity being a game more than a tool. And I've definitely seen people trying to game it to get like kind of a hybrid. No, yeah, I mean, I think there's like a few things here, right? It's like, there's like this knowledge that's being shared. Like I remember I was in the 25 or 2500 Club, and like somebody who's like, here's the secret from the 5000 Club, and they shared it, you know,

43:05
you know, you can do this cuz there's there's some great arcane knowledge, which I don't know if it's actually been officially passed down yet. It was kind of a hack. But people realize that you before REMAX became a thing, some some secret, some secret history, MJ history for people in the 10k Club, realize, we realized that you could do the Custom option, the preferred option sets, I don't know if you've, if you've used those at all. What you can do is you can either just variables, right from a software standpoint, you write them and you can use them. And they realize that you could make a prompt, let's say with a custom variable of I don't know, let's say the prompt is just a cute dog. And the custom variable was nothing, just it's just something just basic. And then they realized that you could then overwrite and change the custom variable, do a reroll or a V roll. And it would then do like a sort of remix where it would then take your initial image and kind of remix it with the new thing that you put in that overriding of the custom option. So it was kind of like people had hacked together remix before it existed. And it was dangerous because it could actually kind of bypass all of the, the filters. So they didn't really want people to get to know about it. So they're like, you can use it but like Keep it keep it in the 10k Club Don't tell the others. So it was funny because it was one of those little secret arcane knowledge where you could use the style command dash dash style, which was like an old thing that hadn't really been deprecated yet, but you could add, you know, in the style of Muppets, and then it would apply that sort of Muppet filter over your initial prompt. In the same way that kind of remix works now. So now it doesn't sound that interesting because remixes exists, but for a while before remix was was out there. You would have these crazy workflows where some would make like three preferred option sets. And the first one would be like, dash dash beginning. And that would include like the prompt. And then the second thing would be like dash dash, you know, settings. And then this one would be like the aspect ratio, and you know if it was test P or test not. And then the third one would maybe be, you know, some other style modifiers. And then they would change these and say, Okay, I was in test P before now I'm going to go back to v3, and downscale or I'm going to upscale it back up to, you know, test P, to get some some more coherence. So you would have people like overriding their custom variables, and then rerunning the prompt and then overriding it again, and then doing it in is a very hacky solution, but it kind of worked. And now remix is obviously a much easier way to do that. But it was interesting, where it was not what the devs intended that use case, but actually turned out to be this amazing feature, which is now remix. So they might have been kind of working on something like remix before. But this was a way that it allowed people to do that, even without it being known. It's a great example of kind of bug turns out to be like, very powerful feature. More than 10 people initially realized, I guess.

Watson Hartsoe  46:19
Yeah, that brings up another question that I'm curious about how you think the filters are applied, or how bad words get used? Or, like this idea that like knowledge exists on ways to get around these things, but it's being moderated in certain ways that aren't totally transparent, or? Yeah, I guess I don't know, if you've run across banned words, or what your thought is around sort of,

46:39
yeah, there's some like random things. I tried to maybe make a shag carpet. When I was making some Muppets thinking, like, what are some good like free, kind of like carpet textures. So it's like, oh, shag carpet is kind of a good one. And then it's like, shag is banned. I was like, Yeah, I can see that. are random things, you know, like blood, things that are either like gore or like vibe to violent related or to you know, pornographic or sexual, seem to be the main buckets, I don't think you can make like Hitler. I don't think you can make Z. The leader of China, which was an interesting one, because you can make other other leaders, I think that's probably more of not wanting to step on China's toes. And not wanting to it's kind of a shame, you know, people can't necessarily do what they want. But in this case, I see it is, is a business and like safety decision, not wanting to purposely piss off China. So there's certain words like that, that are probably for more not political, more just business, right business reasons, he doesn't want to have people attacking him from from, you know, Chinese hackers, who are who are upset about that decision. So I definitely get that in more of those business there kind of safety situations, I think the other ones are more around, not wanting mid journey to become, you know, just a porn creation device, which I'm totally agree with. That's, that's not something that I think it should become. And there's plenty of other stable diffusion. You know, mods out there that are probably specifically trained on on, you know, not safe for work stuff. So you might as well use that. But there's still a ton of people, probably mostly new people that just come in and try to make porn or whatever. So I'm sure that there's a lot of that, that they have to deal with that the mods, you know, manually. In some cases, that gets reported. I think for them with the banned words, it's trying to stop that before it happens. And then I know that they have done something where like, while the image is being processed, there's some sort of anti porn

48:54
filtering going on. It seems like if you're watching the videos, if you do dash dash video, and you watch, you know, when it's being created, you can kind of see like, it'll maybe start drawing a woman who, like doesn't have a shirt on. And then, you know, like, a little bit later, like, it'll put like a shirt back on her. And it's kind of showing that there's probably something that they've baked in. And again, this is this is us theorizing about it, we can't really confirm it. But if I were a dev and I were doing it, that's exactly how I would do it, right. You wouldn't wait till the end, and then just you can wait till the end and then blur out the image and say, sorry, this was this was porn, we can't show it to you. But that's stupid. Because it's like, alright, I wasted you know, a few GPU seconds for something that you can't even show me like what? So they're, they're better solution is probably to say, Okay, if we realize it's leaning towards this, let's specifically avoid it and in the same way that we can guide prompts towards if you prompt for cat, it's going to be, you know, base bouncing around the kind of cat nexus of the latent space, right, all those those vectors in there around Cat. So there's probably a lot of vectors that they can train it on, specifically train it on, on porn things. You know, there's tons of porn datasets out there. And then they just, you know, inverse that. So they say, okay, you know, steer away from that. So if it starts getting too close to something that's, you know, the AI has said, Yes, this is like, 90% chance this is not safe for work, then it's okay steered away from that. So there's probably some sort of a filtering process like that, that they can do. And I think they probably could also do that on the gore on the violence or, you know, stuff with kids gets gets really dangerous. And that's probably the biggest, you know, problem of like, actually illegal stuff that people are making, that's hard for the devs to deal with, to them trying to avoid, you know, those things is their main goal. Things that are that are, you know, really heinous really bad. If it's just like, Oh, it's a topless woman, like, alright, like, not that big of a deal. We can, we can live, you know, but some things are like, really, really bad that that people try to make. So I think part of it is them trying to filter it beforehand was saying, No, you can't, you know, use, you know, the phrase child with with this other keyword. So that's great to phrase it beforehand. But then there's also probably phrasing where maybe it's a totally innocent prompt. But it turns out that like, it's accidentally pushing it in, like a really weird direction. So that's where I think that kind of mid mid filtering process, which maybe is tailored more to not say for work material initially, but might be tailored and other things. And I think that trying to get better at that to remove that banned word list. And say, like, yeah, you can still prompt for, you know, these words, and we're just gonna make sure that like, shag doesn't accidentally get you like sexual images. And it's giving you you know, carpet images instead.

Watson Hartsoe  51:53
Yeah, I mean, I don't want to dwell too long on the negatives of this technology. But I guess we've covered copyright talked about banned words, do you see any other threats to the development of this technology to its application?

52:07
I mean, there's the whole, just propaganda and deep fake stuff, and all that. And right now, like, the images aren't quite good enough, that when they're doing like, I don't know, you know, whatever. Like I said, Joe Biden fighting King Kong, like, it's probably not going to be realistic enough that anyone would really think that was true. But in another year or two, I think that that's going to change, and I think we will continue to have, it's not going to go backwards, right. And whether one platform, whether mid journey says hey, we don't want to become like, a deep fake engine, general think anything should really become that. And they can try to steer away, or like, purposely, you know, make celebrities faces like just a little bit, introduce a little bit of randomness that makes it like kind of impossible to make like a perfect copy, like, it's always gonna be a little off, you can tell. So there's things like that, that they can try to do, you know, specifically from public figures, but you can just imagine, you know, people that are, that are kids now, that are going to be president in the future, and how easy it will be to make any image you want of that person doing anything, and say, Look, you were dressed as Hitler doing, you know, Nazi salute back in, you know, when you were 18, at this frat party, and we have six photos of you to prove it. And here's photos of your friends, too, right? So like that will be possible to do. So things like that become scary that, you know, someone eventually is going to do that. It's not a question of, if it's a question of when. So how do we prevent that and it's not necessarily mid journeys problem, it's just society's problem of things that are artificial photos taken realistically, especially for political purposes, are probably some of the most dangerous or other, you know, blackmail purposes, whatever the reason is, so I think that's just a larger issue of how we deal with it. I think there's been a lot of pushback initially from kind of artists in the art community of people saying, Oh, this is an art, you know, it's not real art and like, this is terrible. You're just stealing the work of artists and this isn't fair, blah, blah, blah. And there's definitely valid. Those are all valid valid feelings, valid emotions. And there's some valid criticism in there, but a lot of it is is due to fear. And for the first time, it's because we're seeing artists now something that was historically kind of an ivory tower, kind of a hottie you know, either you got it or you don't in the art world, right. It's there's so much corruption and like money laundering and the Hyatt and the high art world it's a joke but in the like, medium to low level, you know, the normal art world. There's still a lot of that kind of a bit of a barrier, I guess, where if you don't have those skills, you know, it's not, you can't just put something together and say it's art. But now you have something where people that are not artists at all able to produce images that are so much better than probably 95% of the artists that are out there. And if of course, you're gonna feel threatened by that, but I think it's, it's, it's going to be in a different way that I think people are going to have to adapt in the same way as when the camera came out. Right, in the same way that when these other tools came out, if you think of when GarageBand came out, for for people on their computers, and it was suddenly we're now everyone, you know, how did musicians feel? When Apple was telling everyone that everyone's a musician? Now, everyone's musician doesn't make you feel very good when now everyone can do what you do. And of course, musicians, while probably being a little afraid, in the beginning, realize that Yeah, well, well, the the peons, and the peasants, like, they may have the tools, but like, they don't know how to how to use them effectively. Like we can't, they don't have the, the imagination. And most of them don't. But there are going to be some people that use GarageBand to make really amazing stuff. It's much better than than a musician could ever make, you know, just by itself. So I think every other creative discipline has already kind of gone through this sort of mass consumerization process, in the same way that photography used to be kind of this esoteric high end is kind of elite thing. And now everyone has a smartphone. And now everyone's a photographer, everyone's a musician, now everyone's an artist. And I think it's something that artists hadn't gone through that process, gentrification process,

56:46
I think that they haven't gone through that. So that's why there's so much fear and so much pushback, especially the idea of these systems being trained on their art of saying, Wait, You've stolen my art, you've trained a big machine to turn it out. And now you're letting everyone do that, and they're going to be making money off of off of our stuff, that we're not getting any payment, like, ah, in the same way that GarageBand, you know, all the loops and everything that they've made, are just based off of other, you know, existing songs and stuff that had been changed a bit and kind of made original. And now people are creating things, and it's a little different. And I think they'll probably be some AI GarageBand at some point. But I think that's where a lot of that pushback came from, from the art world, we're probably now they're starting to accept it. And I think in the beginning, there was kind of, it's like the stages of grief. There's the denial stage, we're like, No, this this, like, we have to stop this, this can't happen. And I think now probably people realize you're not going to stop it. Like it's, it's the train has left the station, you can try to keep it on the rails, but like the train has left the station. And I think in this case, it's interesting, just because the technology should just gonna get better and better and better. And it's kind of like, if you can't keep up, then you're gonna be left behind, you know, when Photoshop was invented, and the ability to take a photo and then take another photo. And so I put it in there. It's kind of the same level of jump is what we're doing with mid journey, right? It's just another, it's going from from two to three instead of from one to two. And when Photoshop was invented, I'm sure there was a lot of pushback with people saying, hey, you know, this isn't real art, you're just taking collages of other images. You didn't take those images, in the same way that we're hearing that pushback with mid journey. So I think there's there's definitely valid criticism, valid emotions, valid fears, but at the same time, it's like, if it's not, if the cat isn't gonna go back in the bag, you kind of gotta get on board the trainer or get out of the way. If you're stuck on the tracks and you're pulling up a sign that says no trains, you're just gonna get run over.

Watson Hartsoe  58:51
I really appreciate the the stages of grief when it comes to artists complaining about ai ai. I just pulled it up to sort of look at it I it's like denial, anger, bargaining, depression, acceptance, if you don't want to talk too much about it, but like, I guess where do you see us being right now in that?

59:11
I think different people are in different in different stages. Simon Stalin hag who's a famous like digital artist? He was like, very against it and like very antagonistic about it. Which is funny. Some people are very on board. Some people are very much not. I don't know exactly where we would be. I think we're, we're maybe in the Depression phase. Not sure. Maybe bargaining? Yeah, but there is some interesting discussions if like, if you're an artist that specifically doesn't want your stuff use. You've somehow like submit a form and then you know, stable diffusion and the other models have to like, take your data out. The question is, how do they even know Is your your data? I don't think these datasets are perfectly tagged, like, maybe they could remove all the tags with your name, you know, make your name not not associated with anything. But it's an interesting question of I don't know what power, individual artists have to do anything until it really gets into some sort of litigation.

Watson Hartsoe  1:00:22
Yeah, I mean, that's, I think there, yeah, begin there. There's a lot that I think is up in the air, when it comes to the legality of all this. I'm really thinking that one thing that also maybe we haven't talked about too much is like bias of datasets is being a thing that's holding people back. I know, Google has like some really large datasets that they could be using for this type application, but they're afraid of biases for the types of like patterns that are in it. I don't know if you've run across any biases or patterns in your use of a journey.

1:00:58
Yes, definitely. Lots of lots of patterns. I think. It's obviously vary based on whatever the the dataset is, in then I guess overlaid with whatever the the language, I think they're adding clip or something in, I don't know what they're using now for the language model, but it's like, the language model to interpret the stuff and then that's okay, well, how does that actually, based on the images, if you look at the earlier versions, there was so much more default bias, where there is this very basic looking white, brunette girl who we nicknamed mid journey mag. And I think people just now call her like, Midge. But it was just this hilarious girl that her face would be everywhere. And like, that's the only face you could make, unless you really tried hard to get like a different face, like a black face, or a you know, an Asian face or something. It was always the same like basic looking white. And it was funny, because there was clearly just kind of this sort of local valley right? In the latent space that if you've got anywhere near like a woman or like, pretty face that just kind of the valley that it just ultimately fell into. And it just meant that whatever those default biases were so strong, that you really had to overcome them to like climb out of that valley to find another adjacent valley to kind of fall into. I'm sure you've seen you've seen her face.

Watson Hartsoe  1:02:29
I've certainly seen her face. Yeah.

1:02:35
And the guy the guy was like, mid journey, Mitch or Mike or something. Yeah, here it is. These two archetypes. These are the two the two faces. The kind of like guy with like a beard and kind of like a little bit of hair. And then yeah, there's mag. So those are the main faces that really only make it was interesting, because there's other things in terms of color, where it was really into this sort of palette of like, orange kind of gold and teal. And I did like a bit of a color analysis. And I don't know if I can find that. Let's see.

1:03:22
Specifically, kind of proving that it was all the same colors. And then asking, Could they have more?

1:03:31
Variation? Here it is, here it is. Yes, okay. I think I found it. But you can see it's like without asking for any specific colors, you'll get pretty much the same.

1:03:56
Same palette, this kind of muted. And it's very similar to the palette of like movie posters, if you've ever seen the cliche and movie poster world, but orange and blue being the only colors that work. And it's kind of because they're two very opposing very contrasting type of colors.

1:04:19
And they're used in like almost every kind of action movie poster, just because they work so well. They get your attention. They're very well, it's funny. Thanks. It's explicit. It's definitely not explicit. Classic discord. Let's try this.

Watson Hartsoe  1:04:45
Yes, yeah.

1:04:46
Like it's all it's like almost exactly the same color scheme and I feel like that's probably what someone is. Similarly by saying mid journey, just their two opposing colors that are often used mid journeys a little bit more muted. But if you don't don't specify anything, you'll often get those colors. The test and the test P models are different because they're based on stable diffusion. But in the normal mid journey, I think they're going to do better and before. But some of those biases you really have to overcome. And the best way to do it is by either adding in more noise by like just interesting other words, or specifically asking for what you want. If you don't ask for what you want, it's just going to fall into the same defaults, which is why most people's prompts all end up looking like the same as everyone else's prompts. Because if you just ask for, you know, a castle on top of a hill, there's only so much randomness that's built into those words, where unless you add more things to it, it's always going to look kind of the same.

Watson Hartsoe  1:05:50
Yeah, I remember one of my first sort of like, mini prompts, experiments was around trying to like visualize the word data and information. And it came back, like all the data was like orange, and I was just like, Wow, what an insight What a unique thing. It's like, there was nothing unique about that. But I remember, like sharing that insight with so many people, I was like, Did you know The data is orange, like, data is orange. But I guess like you had mentioned something that I thought was really interesting around, like, the latent space having valleys. I wonder if you could talk more about how you imagine the latent space, or what is the latent space.

1:06:30
I mean, the latent space is hard to visualize for us, because it's, it's probably multi dimensional. But if you abstract it to D, it's a little bit easier. Or like in 3d, you can think of it in almost like outer space, where you have these sort of gravity wells around these big stars are like big, globular clusters of galaxies. And there might be you know, maybe one arm of the galaxy is like very photorealism. And maybe another arm of the galaxy is maybe like anime looking stuff, or like, very artsy stuff. And I think there's different kinds of nodes, or hills or valleys. In 2d, in 3d, they would be like, I guess star gravity, you know, spheres pulling things in, where, if you look at cat, that's probably a very big one, it's a huge cluster, all these stars, and each star is like its own, you know, little image, it's not the image itself, but whatever the, you know, latent kind of, they hash it into like a noise field. And they store that. And whenever those altered things associated with cat are going to be much more, there's a lot of images around cat, there are a lot of kind of diverse images, but they're all very similarly shaped. So that's probably a very strong, big cluster, with a lot of kind of things around it. And then maybe like tigers are kind of an adjacent little, you know, satellite cluster nearby. In when you prompt something, your your tokens are essentially being split up and kind of turned into little points in this giant field, this big Leighton space field, whatever you want to call it. So maybe if you prompt the token cat, it's gonna start out like right in the center of that cluster, because it searches and says, Okay, what is like the minimum distance that I can be? To all of the things that are like, relevant to cat? Or how can I be like closest to cat, which is probably like right in the center of that, that cat galaxy? But then if you add the word, Lisa Frank, right, which is known for her very like vibrant, pastel kind of 90s airbrush colors. That's like a totally different area. So then if Lisa Frank Tolkien is going to start out like right in the middle of Lisa Frank, now you've had both of these Lisa, Frank and cat. So it's kind of like creating this sort of map with different nodes. Right. And, and I don't know if exactly if it's saying, Okay, we're going to take the average of that, and like, what's the average between Lisa Frank and cat, because it's not really quite that simple. Because if you take the average of that, like, maybe you wind up in like dog land or something, so it's not a perfect metaphor, but it tries to kind of blend those two different you know, there's two different points in the latent space, where the Lisa Frank galaxy has a lot of like airbrush teddy bears and unicorns and rainbows and things. And it's probably going to give you like a very, like, colorful looking cat with like rainbow rainbow colors. So I think in a way, depending on what you're prompting, if you prompt only one thing, it only can draw on that cat galaxy, and it can't really escape the pole, the gravity effect galaxy to go like accidentally find yourself in the Lisa Frank Galaxy too. So if you have a very simple prompt, that's why you're going to be stuck in these sort of valleys because You don't have enough, you know, other influences. It's like you've been raised in the valley, and you've never left your whole life, you don't know what it's like in the big city of Star Wars or Muppets. So until you, you add those in. Now, it's like your, your little, your prompt is able to like travel, you know, between those two points, it's able to kind of blend, blend those two galaxies together. So if you have a really complex product with like, 30, different, you know, things that are very different from each other, you're gonna have a lot more randomness and a lot more different things it's trying to draw on. So it's not, again, it's not a perfect metaphor, because it's probably a multi dimensional space, and not really just like a valley. But you can kind of think of it in that way. And I think you also have specific keywords that are super powerful, and other keywords that are not powerful at all. But one keyword that's really powerful is Mona Lisa, if you try to prompt Mona Lisa, especially in test your test P. And if you add something to it, it's just gonna give you Mona Lisa, unless like you really

1:11:06
put a lot of effort into kind of de waiting Mona Lisa, by putting her at the end, in really adding a lot of other stuff, just because there's so many images right in the test training data of Mona Lisa. And it's such like the exact same image. So you can think of that stars being like, super, has a really deep gravity. Well, if you're anywhere near the Mona Lisa, Galaxy, you'll fall right in that in order to get out you have to really add a lot more to your prompt. Because if you add her in, suddenly, she pulls you pulls you right into the kind of black holes of Mona Lisa.

Watson Hartsoe  1:11:41
I love this metaphor. This is the first time I've heard this. I've heard I've heard like people talk about mountains and valleys a lot. But like the 3d space gravity thing, like automatically, I'm just starting to think about prompting differently. Because it's like the Mona Lisa, one's a good example. Like most people will get stuck straight into the gravity well, but like people who know orbital mechanics, like prompt crap, can like use that shot,

1:12:04
can you can you add some orbital mechanics knowledge to prompt crafting to have the perfect trajectory to slingshot yourself around the Lisa Frank galaxy to then reach regional areas? That's the future. Yeah,

Watson Hartsoe  1:12:17
I mean, I mean, I don't want to get carried away with this metaphor. But I definitely do get a sense, like people who are really good at prop craft can pull together really powerful. You know, they can like swing a prompt across these really powerful themes. Like I was just looking at, you know, speaking of orbital mechanics, like, the James Webb Space Telescope had like all these new images of like, distant galaxies, right? And I was like, Oh, this is cool. There's going to be a ton of these images, like, I'm going to try to just like, make things that look like this, but aren't this and like, I started out, I guess, with like, different celebrities in the style of like, Pillars of Creation, because one galaxy, and like, it was so easily easy to see, like, which celebrities had more images, because they would just like appear in front of it. And then like which celebrities have less images, because they would get like lost in the noise of like these like galaxy clusters. Right? And like, Yeah, I mean, it's something that, for me, like understanding, balancing and waiting of words. There's a lot of ways that people approach that I just learned about multi prompting, or oh, gosh, this is so good.

1:13:30
This is just the mean, I

Watson Hartsoe  1:13:33
had this knee. Oh, my gosh, the yellow thing. You're, you're doing yellow. You're you're part of the yellow group.

1:13:43
Do you How did you know about yellow? Yellow,

Watson Hartsoe  1:13:45
I heard about it in office hours. I've talked about it.

1:13:52
Scott is a friend of mine in a couple of us were just coming up with, again, just trying to come up with like, a hero's journey of mid journey and like, who is our protagonist, meet someone that's kind of repeatable. So then it's a test. I think he just made like, what if we try yellow Elmo in kind of like grungy, like, gritty farm documentary, Farmer yellow Alma. And that's just, it's just a great example of using a tool because of course, Elmo is never yellow, but it rhymes. And it just became like a great test subject to see like, okay, let's have Yamo and like, random, weird situations. He was like, hiking to the top of a mountain. Here's, you know, on a fancy dinner date and an Italian restaurant. So there's a lot of fun, fun situations to just use him as like a test subject.

Watson Hartsoe  1:14:40
I feel like you're missing. Who is it Gregor? Toski if you like he's, uh,

1:14:45
his name is just like, in back in the whole the whole galaxy in large lifetime.

Watson Hartsoe  1:14:51
Use the Big Bang Maybe? Who knows? But wow. So this Yamo project. I don't want to I mean, I don't know how many more quotes Since I really have, I don't think there's too much time left in this interview. But yeah, I mean, I feel like I'm leaving with so many more questions than I started with the, like idea of making comics with the journey or putting together stories or having some stability of characters. The yellow thing really highlighted to me, like the challenges of that, and also the opportunity of that, just hearing about in the office hours, um, is that something you're continuing to explore? Or what do you see as being the future of that?

1:15:28
Yeah, I was just talking with Scott and a couple other guys just about like, what are the things as, again, I'm not like a professional working artists, but I, I'm using my journey more like an artist would I guess, then like your average Joe. So Scott, who actually is like an animator, and more professional, they had some great points, which I also agreed with just the ability to have consistency of characters. And I think characters are more important than setting. But if you could do with characters, theoretically, you can do it with anything, but to have the same Yamo and not have him look, you know, like, sometimes he doesn't even notice or sometimes like he has a one eye or like, sometimes, you know, he has like a red frill around his neck. And sometimes he doesn't, just because it's kind of merging these different yellow Elmo muppets and different things together, it's not really the same, it's not really the same dude each time, right? It's a little different. And for stories, if you want to have anything other than just a single image, the the challenge of of mid journey is as beautiful as all these images are, it's like it's this beautiful garden of images, that's just stuck inside mid journey, you really can't use it to create things until you can do things that are more than just single one off images. It's just too ephemeral. If you want to make not just an animation, that would be great. But even just a series of okay, here's the same character in three different situations, you really can't do that. And that's a major, major limitation of mid journey that they're going to have to solve. If they don't want people moving to staple diffusion or other other programs, eventually, I think it's just too big of a handicap that as the other ones move forward, the ability to create a character and then put that character in any situation you want, is too much of a superpower to be ignored. So I think mid journey, hopefully, whether they want to or not, is going to be it'd be dragged into, into putting forth that functionality. I think that's one of the biggest thing that's lacking of bringing majority images to the real world in a way that's more than just like, Okay, I've made one off images. And that's fine for some use cases. But for most projects that aren't about just single images, you want to have some level of consistency. So the ability to say, Okay, here's a character I've defined. And let's see him again. Or here's an object I've decided or a setting I've defined. And we're close to that. But I think that's really going to be that next leap, where if you could define the Elmo, and then put him in different situations, the ability to then create a comic about that, or an animation about that, or whatever you want, right, just a series of poster series, a comic strip, again, there's so many more options than just single images, which are pretty great, but they don't really can't tell a story they're not. They're kind of too shallow, I guess, in my mind, and I think that's the feedback we've seen a lot is like, it partially why mid journey still feels like a game and not a tool yet, is because there's not quite enough control there. To really bring this stuff into the real world to make an impact to say something to mean something, you can do it, but it's it's very limited. So I think once that next step happens, that will be more exciting because then you can really use this art to tell stories in a way that you couldn't nearly as easily previously, unless the characters or less the audience is fine with like the characters just constantly, like changing how they look throughout the story.

Watson Hartsoe  1:19:12
Yeah, I again, like I think I'm gonna ride this metaphor of the, you know, orbital mechanics, I'm going to keep keep puzzling on that. But it's like, how do you establish like a geosynchronous orbit or like a thing where, like, you can just move around the thing? And, like,

1:19:29
add Mona Lisa, that's one way but

Watson Hartsoe  1:19:32
had Mona Lisa it's,

1:19:34
that's that's exactly I think it's like you need to be able to have say, Okay, I've established the Elmo. Here's like, what stable diffusion does is exactly that. Right? It says okay, um, you feed in 510 images of your character in like a few different lighting situations and backgrounds. In it makes like a super strong gravity node right around like, it'd be some of the pieces around like the face of that character right now. and kind of what they look like, where it has freedom to move around in the like background and in pose and composition domains, but didn't like the facial characteristic, you know, domain, it's like very strongly pulled into that black hole of this, you know, whatever character you set it as if majority can do something similar, you'd have to train it somehow. So either you'd have to train it on previous images that journeys created, or, you know, upload a series of images yourself. So that that part's a little bit more questionable, of I don't know exactly how they want to do it. But that image to Image Image Image rate is something that stable diffusion is now doing really well and will continue to get better. So I think in that case, if you could somehow, if mid journey could allow us to make our own little star, right, and just make it a really deep black hole and say, okay, you know, this specific characteristic we want to force to be this, it's kind of you're setting those initial parameters, versus letting them always be random.

Watson Hartsoe  1:21:05
Yeah, I mean, I think I want to reflect on a few things that you've said throughout this interview, in terms of the community of mid journey, like starting with this idea of like, just like seeing everybody's content streaming is like being a great way to learn initially, to like making it into like, these super user clubs, or like arcane knowledge gets shared to like this Yamo project, which for me, like, I guess, at the beginning of what you're describing, like this idea of like, people all painting together, like how hard that is, but like, like, that's like, they're painting together, but like, kind of in parallel, in a sense, like, if you like the yellow project, again, I don't know more about it, I would love to, like Meet Scott or, or talk to more people involved in the project. Because like, I like this idea of like, groups of people agreeing on like, some basic world premises, and like, just like going off in their own wild directions. And I think it's something that happens in little, little places, like little happens like a little bit, but like, I haven't really seen it cohere. And this Yamo example is like, the best thing I've found.

1:22:07
You Yeah, I mean, it started. So we had just like a private server just to mess around with the bot. So I think because the main channels got to that initial collaboration, I met Ryan through the show and tell channel, but I think I met I forget how I met Scott, maybe through the 10k channel. But the show Intel channel was just people showing and telling and other image generation channels as they got too noisy. I think people were interested in the kind of remix and each other stuff for collaborating. But it was also where you don't actually want to do that with randos. Like, it's fine. But as they're more and more randos in there, it becomes less fun. So what's fun is to like riff on it with with people that you're actually friends with or becoming friends with. And that's where I think when we created the yellow idea, it was like, Okay, could we use mid just kind of an experiment? Can we use mid journey to tell the kind of Joseph Campbell's right hero's journey, that kind of classic myth through mid journey through like a series of images and to tell the story, maybe we would, it's not really like a hard, you know, very clearly defined project, it was just kind of like, Alright, here's this, this idea, let's run with it. And it kind of morphed into just developing that character of, of yellow Elmo. And I think the first one was him just like kind of a grungy look in the yellow LML. Like, in like big mud city. This is a very muddy, it was just trying to make it kind of absurd. Specifically to kind of make it weird and opposite of the normal Muppet experience, which was just like super happy, super positive. And like, imagine if like things didn't go so well. What if like yellow Elmo, like really worked long days on the farm and had like, kind of a rough light? Like, what would that look like? So that was kind of the initial the initial few images and we just kind of started riffing from there and started going in different directions. And I think just the hilarity of something as absurd as like a muppet, which are just goofy looking by themselves, especially in real situations, or with humans, to have like, a muppet, like, at a coffee shop with, you know, a hipster looking guy on his on his laptop. And just seeing where MJ takes that, and especially because MJ is kind of weird and will just do things that real artists would never do have, like, put them up it. I don't know. Like, there was one where instead of having them up at talking to the guy, it was like the Muppet was in a painting like on the wall like a framed portrait is if like, he was like a valued family member. It was just like weird, weird things that you would never think to do. And I think that's where it just kind of becomes unintentionally funny. Where it's sort of a game in like a social game experience. Rather than playing like a multiplayer video game. You're kind of playing this multiplayer Imagination game where you're kind of imagining these wild scenarios and saying, what about this? What would this look like? And then someone says, ooh, that's pretty good. What would this look like, and you're able to kind of riff on each other. So I think yomo is just a great example of having a coherent character to put them in different situations. And we could all be in the same channel, just making images and being kind of goofy and getting ideas back and forth. We haven't developed it necessarily to like write, we're gonna write like a serious graphic novel about Yamo. Yet, it's more of just exploring different ideas. But if you have a few people that are all have similar skill set, at least, like who've progressed enough, where it's not like someone who's brand new to mid journey and can't keep up. But if everyone is relatively similar in what they can do, then it's a very fun experience, especially if you're trying to prompt for like funny things. If you're trying to prompt for like depression, then obviously, it's not gonna be as much fun. But if you're trying to prompt for goofy things, it's a great just kind of social experience. In the same way that you know, watching a funny video on YouTube, or, you know, playing a comedy video game or something, where you are Kind of the director and coming up with these wild wacky scenarios, in then being able to share those with other people. And that's, I think a lot of the fun of those upper echelon channels, is a lot of times it's people sharing, like cool stuff. But also, a lot of times, just like something really goofy happened, and like, someone wanted to share it, and people will just laugh at it. Because I think we're all we're all humans. And we know that like mid Jeremy comes up with some really, really wild luck and stuff.

1:26:47
So those are just, I think, some great examples where if you have a small group of people that you've already kind of have some relation with. And if you all have a similar sense of humor, it can be a fun, you know, small group setting. I think if you have too many people, then it's hard because it just gets either too chaotic or someone like, doesn't think it's funny. And it's just like, you know, not into it. But if you have a couple of folks, and if you have a similar character or some situation. I'm sure there's other pockets of folks that are using it similarly in that way.

Watson Hartsoe  1:27:20
Yeah, I talked to people who are using it for like, d&d, like they were Yeah, yeah. Yeah, like the idea of a dungeon just becoming like these sets of images that everybody can share. And you

1:27:33
can do that in real time. Or you can have like an iPad with the Dungeon Master. I'm sure I've never played d&d, but I know, I know, like the basics of how it works. But I can imagine, you know, the character say, like, Okay, we want to go in the dungeon like what's there and he can type it in as he's describing it. And then visualize so there's, there's a lot of that power if you can do things in real time to make it kind of almost Interactive, I'm sure.

Watson Hartsoe  1:27:57
Yeah, really, I I've done some work with the hero's journey before it's like a organizing structure for projects. And I think that that's also like a really interesting thing. Like what is the scaffold that people are agreeing on to build you know, in in Dungeons and Dragons, it's like, there's like certain like, I don't know premacy I've also not done it. So I don't have a good sense of like, what structures are a good campaign? But I guess like, yeah, like, like improv comedy. I think that I tried to like make funny memes and stuff like this and like sharing with friends who are comedians like see if they think they're funny like at the beginning you said Muppets paying taxes I did a whole series on like polka mon paying taxes. And it was like, I don't know like, just like great watching Pikachu. You know, have to have to think about his 10 1040 or 1099 I don't know if he's a independent contractor what but I'm like thinking I I think there's a lot I could I could continue to talk to you about I want to just again, thank you for your time though. And is there anything else like generally you would think's important for this research? I think we're there's like three people on this team researching. I think the other people are interested more in like banned words and filters. I'm really interested in like new creative practices, but we're going to definitely share back the the research as it, you know, coheres and hopefully turns into a publication but can't thank you enough again for your time.

1:29:26
Yeah, it's a it's a wild different like a wild west. So it's been interesting to see just the trajectory of how everything moves forward. But yeah, happy to connect you with with Scott, if you're interested in talking to him, just because I know he's much more of like a practicing artists than I am. But also what's interesting with him, which I forgot about this, he's actually teaching a class currently. Smart guy. He's the chair of the animation department at DePaul University in to Chicago. And he is teaching a class that he got approved that I think just started specifically about like aI art. So he's actually using, like in talking about teaching mid journey in the class, which is pretty fun. He's looking at a kind of from, like an animation standpoint of how you might use it to like, you know, storyboarding and concept design and all that jazz. It can't really do like animation by itself yet, but from a tool. I know that he's been thinking a lot about that specifically also in education space. So could be someone interesting to chat with. At a
